<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Appendices</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <h1>Appendices</h1>

  <p class="appendix-title">Appendix A: Complete Headmaster List</p>

  <p class="first">The following list represents the most complete reconstruction of Hogwarts headmasters and headmistresses currently possible. Dates are approximate where records are incomplete; house affiliations are noted where known. Gaps in the record reflect periods of uncertain or disputed leadership.</p>

  <p><strong>Founder Era (c. 990-1050)</strong></p>
  <p>Collective governance by the four founders</p>

  <p><strong>Early Medieval Period (c. 1050-1200)</strong></p>
  <p>Everard the Earnest (c. 1050-1080) — Hufflepuff</p>
  <p>Felberta Spore (c. 1080-1112) — Ravenclaw</p>
  <p>Heliotrope Wilkins (c. 1112-1139) — Gryffindor</p>
  <p>Beaumont Marjoribanks (c. 1139-1167) — Hufflepuff</p>
  <p>Eoessa Sakndenberg (c. 1167-1199) — Ravenclaw</p>

  <p><strong>High Medieval Period (c. 1200-1400)</strong></p>
  <p>Wilfred Elphick (c. 1199-1234) — Gryffindor</p>
  <p>Gifford Ollerton (c. 1234-1268) — Gryffindor</p>
  <p>Archibald Alderton (c. 1268-1291) — Slytherin</p>
  <p>Vindictus Veridian (c. 1291-1328) — Ravenclaw</p>
  <p>Ethelred Hitchens (c. 1328-1356) — Hufflepuff</p>
  <p>Crispin Cronk (c. 1356-1389) — Slytherin</p>
  <p>Yardley Platt (c. 1389-1408) — Slytherin</p>

  <p><strong>Late Medieval Period (c. 1400-1500)</strong></p>
  <p>Dexter Fortescue (c. 1408-1442) — Gryffindor</p>
  <p>Quentin Trimble I (c. 1442-1471) — Ravenclaw</p>
  <p>Walter Aragon (c. 1471-1503) — Hufflepuff</p>

  <p><strong>Early Modern Period (c. 1500-1700)</strong></p>
  <p>Edessa Sakndenberg (c. 1503-1547) — Ravenclaw</p>
  <p>Elizabeth Burke (1547-1548) — Slytherin</p>
  <p>Vindictus Rackharrow (c. 1548-1582) — Slytherin</p>
  <p>Phyllida Spore (c. 1582-1619) — Hufflepuff</p>
  <p>Ambrose Swott (c. 1619-1654) — Ravenclaw</p>
  <p>Dilys Derwent (c. 1654-1697) — Unknown</p>

  <p><strong>Eighteenth Century</strong></p>
  <p>Brutus Malfoy (1698, three months) — Slytherin</p>
  <p>Basil Flack (c. 1698-1743) — Gryffindor</p>
  <p>Everard II (c. 1743-1782) — Ravenclaw</p>
  <p>Eupraxia Mole (c. 1782-1809) — Hufflepuff</p>

  <p><strong>Nineteenth Century</strong></p>
  <p>Dexter Fortescue II (c. 1809-1847) — Gryffindor</p>
  <p>Phineas Nigellus Black (c. 1847-1899) — Slytherin</p>

  <p><strong>Twentieth Century to Present</strong></p>
  <p>Armando Dippet (c. 1899-1956) — Ravenclaw</p>
  <p>Albus Dumbledore (c. 1956-present) — Gryffindor</p>

  <p style="margin-top: 1em;"><em>Note: This list is necessarily incomplete. Records from the early centuries are fragmentary, and some headmasters may have served terms too brief or controversial to have been preserved in the historical record.</em></p>

  <hr/>

  <p class="appendix-title">Appendix B: Technical Analysis of Major Enchantments</p>

  <p class="first">This appendix provides technical details on several significant enchantments at Hogwarts, intended for the specialist reader with background in magical theory.</p>

  <p><strong>The Great Hall Ceiling</strong></p>
  <p>Ravenclaw's ceiling enchantment operates through a form of spatial folding that connects the physical ceiling to a point in the air directly above the castle. The connection is not a simple portal; rather, the ceiling occupies both locations simultaneously, displaying the exterior sky while maintaining structural integrity. The enchantment incorporates sophisticated weather-filtering charms that allow light and visual information to pass while blocking physical precipitation. Magical analysis conducted in 1892 identified at least seventeen distinct enchantment layers, several of which operate on principles not documented in any surviving magical text.</p>

  <p><strong>The Anti-Apparition Wards</strong></p>
  <p>The anti-Apparition wards function by creating a persistent spatial distortion throughout the protected area. This distortion prevents the dimensional transition that Apparition requires, causing the spell to fail without dangerous fragmentation. The wards are anchored at multiple points around the perimeter and reinforced by the castle's magical saturation. Attempts to Apparate into the protected area from outside encounter additional resistance; the wards actively reject incoming transitions, sometimes with significant force. The exact mechanism by which the wards distinguish between authorised and unauthorised transitions (as when Headmasters permit specific Apparitions) has not been fully documented.</p>

  <p><strong>The Sorting Hat</strong></p>
  <p>The Sorting Hat represents a unique form of enchanted object: an artifact capable of genuine cognition. Unlike portraits, which simulate consciousness based on preserved memory patterns, the Hat appears to think in real time, evaluating each student's mind against criteria encoded during its creation. The Hat's cognitive architecture combines elements of all four founders' magical styles, creating a synthetic judgment that no individual founder would necessarily have reached. The Hat can communicate through speech, song, and direct mental impression; it demonstrates personality, preferences, and even something resembling emotion. Whether the Hat is conscious in the full sense remains debated among magical philosophers.</p>

  <p><strong>The Moving Staircases</strong></p>
  <p>The staircase enchantments combine mobility charms with what appears to be a form of intent-detection magic. The stairs respond, at least partially, to the desires of those using them, though the response is neither immediate nor reliable. The movement patterns exhibit mathematical regularities that suggest an underlying logic, but these regularities are not consistent enough to permit reliable prediction. Analysis conducted in 1734 proposed that the staircases operate according to a form of magical chaos, deterministic in principle but unpredictable in practice. This theory has not been definitively confirmed or refuted.</p>

  <hr/>

  <p class="appendix-title">Appendix C: Architectural Floor Plans</p>

  <p class="first"><em>The following descriptions are offered in lieu of visual floor plans, which cannot capture the castle's fluid nature.</em></p>

  <p><strong>Ground Floor</strong></p>
  <p>The ground floor contains the entrance hall, the Great Hall, and various offices and classrooms. The entrance hall opens to the grounds through the castle's main doors; from it, one can access the marble staircase leading to upper floors, the doors to the Great Hall, and various corridors leading to other ground-floor spaces. The Great Hall occupies the ground floor's largest space; its dimensions (approximately 150 feet by 40 feet) remain stable, though its relationship to surrounding spaces appears to shift periodically.</p>

  <p><strong>Dungeon Levels</strong></p>
  <p>The dungeons extend for at least three levels below the ground floor, though reports of deeper levels persist. The first dungeon level contains the Potions classroom, the Slytherin common room, and various storage spaces. The second level contains additional storage, some abandoned spaces of uncertain original purpose, and passages to the third level. The third level's contents are not fully documented; access is restricted.</p>

  <p><strong>Upper Floors</strong></p>
  <p>The castle's upper floors contain classrooms, offices, dormitories, and various special-purpose spaces. Numbering is inconsistent; what one source calls the "third floor" may be another source's "fourth floor." The moving staircases connect these floors in ways that vary by time and circumstance. Major landmarks include the library (spanning multiple floors), the hospital wing, the Gryffindor and Ravenclaw towers, and the Headmaster's tower.</p>

  <p><strong>External Structures</strong></p>
  <p>External structures include the greenhouses, the Quidditch pitch, the groundskeeper's hut, the Owlery, and various outbuildings of lesser significance. The Whomping Willow, while not a structure, represents a significant ground feature. The boundaries of the protected grounds extend approximately half a mile from the castle in all directions.</p>

  <p><em>Note: All measurements and descriptions are approximate. The castle's spatial properties make precise mapping impossible.</em></p>

  <hr/>

  <p class="appendix-title">Appendix D: Founder Artifact Documentation</p>

  <p class="first"><strong>What Survives</strong></p>
  <p><em>Gryffindor's Sword:</em> A goblin-forged blade of exceptional craftsmanship, capable of absorbing properties that strengthen it. The sword appears to Gryffindors in need and has been confirmed to exist as recently as the twentieth century. Current location: unknown (the sword does not remain in any fixed location).</p>
  <p><em>The Sorting Hat:</em> Originally Gryffindor's, enchanted by all four founders. Currently held in the Headmaster's office, brought out annually for the Sorting ceremony. Functional and apparently unchanged since creation.</p>
  <p><em>Slytherin's Locket:</em> A gold locket bearing Slytherin's mark. Passed through his descendants for centuries before its trail was lost in the nineteenth century. Current location: unknown.</p>
  <p><em>Hufflepuff's Cup:</em> A small golden cup with two handles and a badger engraved on its surface. Last documented in the possession of the Smith family in the early twentieth century. Current location: unknown.</p>

  <p><strong>What is Lost</strong></p>
  <p><em>Ravenclaw's Diadem:</em> A tiara said to enhance the wisdom of its wearer. Stolen by Rowena Ravenclaw's daughter Helena and hidden in Albania. Location remained unknown for centuries; recent rumours suggest it may have been found, though confirmation is lacking.</p>
  <p><em>Various personal effects:</em> Wands, correspondence, clothing, and other personal items of the founders have not survived. The founders' wands would be objects of considerable historical interest; their absence is regrettable.</p>

  <p><strong>What is Legend</strong></p>
  <p><em>The Chamber of Secrets:</em> If the Chamber exists, it may contain artifacts of Slytherin's creation. The nature of these hypothetical artifacts cannot be determined without access to the Chamber itself, which has never been confirmed to exist.</p>
  <p><em>Founder portraits:</em> No verified portraits of the founders painted during their lifetimes have survived. Portraits claiming to represent the founders exist but are of much later creation and cannot be considered authentic sources.</p>

  <hr/>

  <p class="appendix-title">Appendix E: The Hogwarts Charter</p>

  <p class="first"><em>Reconstructed from fragments preserved in the Hogwarts archives, the Ministry of Magic historical collection, and various private holdings. Gaps in the text are indicated by brackets.</em></p>

  <blockquote>
  <p>We, the founders of this school, being Godric of Gryffindor, Helga of Hufflepuff, Rowena of Ravenclaw, and Salazar of Slytherin, do hereby establish this place of learning for the instruction of young witches and wizards in the magical arts.</p>

  <p>The school shall receive all children who show magical ability, regardless of [...] and shall instruct them in the knowledge and skills necessary for the responsible practice of magic.</p>

  <p>The school shall be governed by its founders and, upon their passing, by such successors as they shall designate, who shall preserve the founders' intentions and protect the school's mission.</p>

  <p>The school shall remain independent of [...] authority, answering only to its own conscience and to the welfare of its students.</p>

  <p>Students shall be sorted into four houses, each bearing the name of a founder, according to their qualities and temperaments. The houses shall [...] in friendship and healthy rivalry, each contributing to the school's excellence.</p>

  <p>[...] the castle and its grounds shall be protected by such enchantments as the founders deem necessary, ensuring the safety of all within.</p>

  <p>This charter shall endure for so long as the school remains faithful to its founding purpose: the education of magical youth for the benefit of all.</p>
  </blockquote>

  <p><em>Note: The complete text of the original charter, if it still exists, has not been located. This reconstruction represents scholarly consensus based on available fragments.</em></p>

  <hr/>

  <p class="appendix-title">Appendix F: Notable Alumni by Century</p>

  <p class="first">The following represents a selective listing of notable Hogwarts alumni, organised by century of attendance. Inclusion reflects significant contribution to magical society; this list is not comprehensive.</p>

  <p><strong>Eleventh Century</strong></p>
  <p>Limited records; individual alumni cannot be reliably identified.</p>

  <p><strong>Twelfth Century</strong></p>
  <p>Hengist of Woodcroft (founder of Hogsmeade)</p>
  <p>Bridget Wenlock (arithmancer)</p>

  <p><strong>Thirteenth Century</strong></p>
  <p>Almerick Sawbridge (conqueror of the River Troll)</p>
  <p>Oswald Beamish (goblin rights advocate)</p>

  <p><strong>Fourteenth Century</strong></p>
  <p>Bowman Wright (inventor of the Golden Snitch)</p>
  <p>Beatrix Bloxam (author)</p>

  <p><strong>Fifteenth Century</strong></p>
  <p>Sir Nicholas de Mimsy-Porpington (courtier, subsequently ghost)</p>
  <p>Daisy Dodderidge (founder of the Leaky Cauldron)</p>

  <p><strong>Sixteenth Century</strong></p>
  <p>Gondoline Oliphant (magizoologist)</p>
  <p>Cornelius Agrippa (alchemist)</p>

  <p><strong>Seventeenth Century</strong></p>
  <p>Havelock Sweeting (unicorn expert)</p>
  <p>Dymphna Furmage (who survived multiple fairy abductions)</p>

  <p><strong>Eighteenth Century</strong></p>
  <p>Artemisia Lufkin (first female Minister for Magic)</p>
  <p>Grogan Stump (Minister for Magic)</p>

  <p><strong>Nineteenth Century</strong></p>
  <p>Hesper Starkey (potioneer)</p>
  <p>Dorcas Wellbeloved (founder of the Society for Distressed Witches)</p>

  <p><strong>Twentieth Century</strong></p>
  <p>Newton Scamander (magizoologist and author)</p>
  <p>[Further entries omitted pending permission from living subjects]</p>

  <hr/>

  <p class="appendix-title">Appendix G: Creature Census</p>

  <p class="first">The following creatures have been documented on Hogwarts grounds across the school's history. Current population status is noted where known.</p>

  <p><strong>Lake Inhabitants</strong></p>
  <p>Merpeople (colony established pre-founding; current population approximately 100)</p>
  <p>Giant Squid (single specimen; arrival date disputed)</p>
  <p>Grindylows (population variable)</p>
  <p>Various magical and non-magical fish species</p>

  <p><strong>Forest Inhabitants</strong></p>
  <p>Centaurs (herd of approximately 50)</p>
  <p>Acromantulas (colony established mid-twentieth century; population growing)</p>
  <p>Unicorns (small herd)</p>
  <p>Thestrals (domesticated herd maintained by groundskeeper)</p>
  <p>Bowtruckles, fairies, and various smaller creatures</p>

  <p><strong>Castle Residents</strong></p>
  <p>House-elves (approximately 100)</p>
  <p>Ghosts (approximately 20 in regular residence)</p>
  <p>Peeves the Poltergeist</p>
  <p>Various enchanted objects with creature-like properties</p>

  <p><strong>Grounds Residents</strong></p>
  <p>Whomping Willow (single specimen; planted mid-twentieth century)</p>
  <p>Various creatures maintained for Care of Magical Creatures instruction (population varies by curriculum requirements)</p>

  <hr/>

  <p class="appendix-title">Appendix H: Bibliography and Sources</p>

  <p class="first">Primary sources consulted in the preparation of this work include:</p>

  <p><em>Hogwarts Archives:</em> Charter fragments, governance records, student rolls, and administrative correspondence (access restricted; special permission required)</p>
  <p><em>Ministry of Magic Historical Collection:</em> Education-related records, correspondence with Hogwarts officials, and investigation files (access restricted; some materials remain classified)</p>
  <p><em>Portrait Interviews:</em> Conducted over four decades with headmaster portraits and other significant portraits throughout the castle</p>
  <p><em>Ghost Testimonies:</em> Formal interviews with Sir Nicholas de Mimsy-Porpington, the Fat Friar, and other ghosts willing to participate</p>
  <p><em>House-elf oral histories:</em> Collected with the assistance of the Hogwarts elf community</p>

  <p>Secondary sources include:</p>

  <p>Waffling, Adalbert. <em>Hogwarts Through the Ages.</em> Little Red Books, 1749.</p>
  <p>Viridian, Vindictus III. <em>The Founders: A Sceptical Examination.</em> Obscurus Books, 1856.</p>
  <p>Trimble, Quentin II. <em>The Dark Forces: A Guide to Self-Protection.</em> Little Red Books, 1891.</p>
  <p>Scamander, Newt. <em>Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them.</em> Obscurus Books, 1927.</p>

  <p>Numerous articles in <em>The Practical Potioneer</em>, <em>Transfiguration Today</em>, and <em>The Historical Quarterly of Magical Britain</em> have also informed this work.</p>

  <p style="margin-top: 2em;"><em>For those wishing to pursue their own research, the Hogwarts Library maintains an extensive collection of materials related to the school's history. Access requires current student or staff status, or special permission from the Headmaster.</em></p>

</body>
</html>