<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 21: The Board of Governors</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <p class="chapter-number">Chapter Twenty-One</p>
  <h2>The Board of Governors</h2>

  <p class="first">The Board of Governors emerged in the century after the founders' deaths as a mechanism for external oversight of the school. Its original purpose was conservative: to ensure that the founders' intentions were honoured and that the school did not drift from its original mission. Over time, the Board's role has expanded and its relationship with the Headmaster has grown more complex, oscillating between supportive collaboration and outright conflict.</p>

  <p>The Board's origins are poorly documented, but the earliest references appear in records from approximately 1150, describing a "council of benefactors" who provided financial support and received in exchange a voice in school governance. These early governors were primarily wealthy magical families who had donated to the school's endowment. Their involvement was originally advisory; they offered suggestions that the Head could accept or reject. Over generations, this advisory role hardened into supervisory authority. By the fourteenth century, the Board claimed the power to appoint and remove the Head.</p>

  <p>The composition of the Board has always been controversial. For much of its history, governors were drawn exclusively from wealthy pure-blood families, making the Board an essentially aristocratic institution. Critics argued that this composition gave disproportionate influence to a narrow segment of wizarding society and allowed traditional prejudices to shape school policy. Defenders responded that the families represented on the Board had demonstrated commitment to the school through generations of financial support and were entitled to a voice in its governance.</p>

  <p>The selection of governors has varied by period. At times, Board seats have been effectively hereditary, passing within families from generation to generation. At other times, the Ministry has claimed the right to appoint governors, usually during periods of Ministry strength and school weakness. The current system combines elements of both: some seats are held by families with traditional claims, while others are filled by Ministry appointment. This hybrid system pleases no one entirely but has proven stable enough to persist.</p>

  <p>The Board's powers are both considerable and circumscribed. Governors can appoint and remove the Headmaster, approve major policy changes, oversee the school's finances, and intervene in matters affecting the school's reputation. But governors cannot meddle in day-to-day operations, cannot dictate curriculum content, and cannot overrule the Headmaster on matters of student discipline. These limitations reflect hard-won boundaries established through centuries of conflict between ambitious governors and independent-minded heads.</p>

  <p>Historical conflicts between the Board and various headmasters have occasionally reached crisis proportions. In 1672, the Board attempted to remove Headmistress Dilys Derwent over her admission of Muggle-born students from families of known anti-magical sentiment. Derwent refused to recognise the removal as legitimate; the conflict was resolved only when the Ministry intervened to restore Derwent to her position. In 1847, the Board and Headmaster Phineas Nigellus Black clashed over Black's proposal to expel all students who failed their O.W.L.s; Black eventually withdrew the proposal under threat of his own removal. These conflicts illustrate the ongoing tension between the Board's authority and the Headmaster's independence.</p>

  <p>The Board's relationship with the Ministry of Magic has been equally fraught. Both entities claim a legitimate interest in Hogwarts: the Ministry as the government responsible for magical education, the Board as the school's designated oversight body. When Ministry and Board agree, governance proceeds smoothly. When they disagree, students and staff are caught between competing authorities. The periods of greatest institutional stability at Hogwarts have generally been periods when the Board and Ministry were either in alignment or when one was clearly dominant and the other quiescent.</p>

  <p>Reform movements have periodically sought to democratise the Board, replacing the traditional elite composition with representatives elected by parents, alumni, or the broader wizarding community. These movements have achieved limited success. The 1902 reforms expanded the Board to include two governors chosen by vote of Hogwarts alumni, a modest concession to democratic principle that did not fundamentally alter the Board's character. More ambitious reforms have been proposed and defeated; the traditional families that dominate the Board have proven adept at defending their prerogatives.</p>

</body>
</html>