<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 16: Hidden Passages</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <p class="chapter-number">Chapter Sixteen</p>
  <h2>Hidden Passages</h2>

  <p class="first">Hogwarts contains an unknown number of hidden passages, secret routes between locations that appear on no official map. Some of these passages were built by the founders as escape routes or defensive features. Others were added by subsequent inhabitants for purposes ranging from innocent convenience to active criminality. Still others may have been created by the castle itself, manifestations of its tendency to develop unexpected features over time. The total count is genuinely unknown; new passages are discovered every few generations, and old passages are forgotten or become impassable.</p>

  <p>The known passages fall into several categories. The first category consists of passages between locations within the castle itself, shortcuts that allow rapid movement without navigating the moving staircases or passing through publicly visible corridors. These internal passages have obvious utility for students wishing to avoid detection, whether for innocent reasons like reaching class on time or less innocent reasons like nocturnal wandering. The staff are aware of many such passages but probably not all.</p>

  <p>The second category consists of passages leading out of the castle to locations on the grounds or in Hogsmeade village. The most famous of these runs from behind a statue of a one-eyed witch on the third floor to the cellar of Honeydukes sweetshop. This passage predates Honeydukes itself, which was established only in the eighteenth century; where the passage originally emerged is not recorded. The passage's existence is an open secret among students, who have used it for unauthorized Hogsmeade visits for generations. That the school authorities have never sealed it suggests either that they cannot find its castle entrance or that they consider student pranks an acceptable price for maintaining an emergency escape route.</p>

  <p>A passage beneath the Whomping Willow leads to a building in Hogsmeade known as the Shrieking Shack. This passage is of recent construction, added in the twentieth century under circumstances that remain partially classified. The official story holds that the passage was created for "maintenance purposes," an explanation that no serious historian finds credible. The Shrieking Shack earned its name in the same period the passage was constructed, suggesting a connection between the two. What that connection might be has been the subject of considerable speculation, none of it confirmed.</p>

  <p>Other passages are believed to exist but have not been definitively confirmed. Persistent stories describe a passage to the forest, allowing egress beyond the school's wards. Another tradition holds that a passage once connected Hogwarts to Hogsmeade Station, though if so it has been sealed or collapsed. The dungeons are said to contain passages to locations unknown, perhaps including exits far from the castle that could be used if the main routes were compromised.</p>

  <p>Several passages that once existed have become impassable. A tunnel to the village was collapsed deliberately during a security review in 1674. Another passage, leading to a point on the lake shore, was flooded when the lake level rose in 1812 and has never been drained. These lost passages live on in student folklore, their destinations acquiring an air of mystery that functioning passages lack.</p>

  <p>An anonymous source, a map of uncertain provenance that came into the possession of this historian in the 1920s, depicts the castle with considerably more passages than official records acknowledge. The map, if genuine, was created by students with exceptional knowledge of the castle's hidden features. It shows passages behind paintings, under staircases, and within walls that appear solid. I was unable to verify all of the map's claims before it was confiscated by the Headmaster's office under circumstances I prefer not to discuss. But the passages I did verify were accurately depicted, lending credibility to the map's other claims. The castle is riddled with secrets. Those who know where to look can move through it almost invisibly.</p>

  <p>The security implications of hidden passages have troubled Headmasters throughout Hogwarts' history. A castle honeycombed with secret routes cannot be fully secured; an intruder who knew the passages could bypass the wards and defences designed to protect the main approaches. Yet attempts to seal the passages have always been incomplete. Some passages cannot be found. Others are so thoroughly enchanted that magical sealing fails. And there is a persistent view, held by several Headmasters, that the passages serve important purposes: as escape routes in emergencies, as safety valves for student energy, and perhaps as tests of ingenuity that identify particularly clever or determined individuals. The passages remain. The castle keeps its secrets.</p>

</body>
</html>