<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 15: The Towers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <p class="chapter-number">Chapter Fifteen</p>
  <h2>The Towers</h2>

  <p class="first">The towers of Hogwarts define the castle's silhouette, rising against the Scottish sky in a profile that has become synonymous with magical education in Britain. There are, depending on how one counts, between seven and twelve towers, the uncertainty reflecting disagreements about what constitutes a tower versus a turret versus a particularly ambitious chimney. The major towers each have their own histories and characters.</p>

  <p>Gryffindor Tower houses the common room and dormitories of Gryffindor house. Its entrance is guarded by a portrait of a large woman in a pink dress, known simply as the Fat Lady, who has controlled access to the tower for at least five centuries. When she arrived and who painted her are unknown; she is sufficiently old that her memories of her own origins have become unreliable. The Fat Lady requires a password for admission, singing the password in her substantial operatic voice and refusing entry to those who cannot provide it. Her portrait has been attacked, damaged, and temporarily replaced on several occasions, but she has always returned, apparently considering the post her calling.</p>

  <p>The password system itself predates the Fat Lady. Early Gryffindors were admitted by a portrait of a knight whose name has been forgotten, and before that by a mechanical lock that recognised the magical signatures of authorised students. The shift to portrait guardianship reflected a broader trend in magical security toward living, or pseudo-living, gatekeepers capable of judgment and adaptation. A lock can be picked; a portrait can raise an alarm.</p>

  <p>Ravenclaw Tower, at the castle's west end, takes a different approach to security. Instead of a password, the tower's entrance requires answering a riddle posed by a bronze eagle-shaped door knocker. The riddles vary and do not repeat in any known pattern. Students who cannot answer must wait for a housemate who can, or attempt to reason through the problem, or knock and hope the knocker provides a hint. This system, apparently original to the tower's construction, embodies Ravenclaw's philosophy that intelligence is the true key to worthy endeavours.</p>

  <p>The riddle-door has created both opportunities and problems over the centuries. Clever students from other houses have occasionally gained access by answering correctly, a loophole that Ravenclaw herself may have intended as a reward for intellectual merit regardless of house affiliation. Less clever Ravenclaws have sometimes spent hours outside their own common room, their dormitory beds tantalisingly close but intellectually out of reach. The door knocker itself has developed, or always possessed, a certain personality; its riddles sometimes seem tailored to the individual student, testing not just knowledge but self-knowledge.</p>

  <p>The Astronomy Tower, the castle's tallest, has served its current purpose since the 1280 expansion, though some astronomical observation occurred from various high points before then. The tower's height places it above most weather, affording clear views of the night sky even when lower elevations are clouded. The top platform, where practical astronomy classes are conducted, is enchanted against wind and cold, allowing students to observe in reasonable comfort even in Scottish winters.</p>

  <p>The Owlery occupies its own tower, given over entirely to the school's owl population. Hundreds of owls roost there, school owls available for student use and personal owls belonging to students and staff. The tower is open to the elements, the better to allow the birds free passage; students visiting to send post must accept that the owlery is, essentially, an outdoor space with roof, cold and draughty and liberally decorated with owl droppings. The smell is considerable. But the view from the Owlery windows is among the best in the castle, and some students find excuses to linger despite the conditions.</p>

  <p>Not all towers have survived the centuries. The South-Southeast Tower, constructed as part of the 1350 expansion, collapsed in 1402 under circumstances that have never been fully explained. One moment it stood; the next it was rubble. No students died, as the tower was unoccupied at the time, but the incident prompted a comprehensive review of the castle's structural enchantments. The tower was not rebuilt; its base remains visible from certain angles, a foundation with nothing above it, a reminder that even magical architecture is not eternal.</p>

  <p>The Headmaster's Tower, expanded significantly in 1762, contains the Headmaster's office and private quarters. Its gargoyle guardian, which requires a password to permit access to the moving spiral staircase within, has become one of the castle's more recognisable fixtures. The office itself is discussed in Book III; here I note only that the tower's expansion reflected growing expectations about the Headmaster's role and status. The founders had no such tower; they lived among the students. Modern Headmasters live apart and above, literally as well as figuratively.</p>

</body>
</html>