<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 20: The Headmaster Position</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <p class="chapter-number">Chapter Twenty</p>
  <h2>The Headmaster Position</h2>

  <p class="first">The position of Headmaster or Headmistress of Hogwarts is the most prestigious post in British magical education and one of the most influential positions in wizarding society. The Headmaster speaks for Hogwarts, interprets its traditions, and shapes the education of every witch and wizard who passes through its halls. Yet the position emerged gradually, a solution to the governance vacuum left by the founders' deaths rather than a deliberately designed office.</p>

  <p>The founders governed Hogwarts collectively, making decisions through discussion and, presumably, argument. When they disagreed, they compromised or accommodated. There was no tie-breaking authority, no final arbiter of disputes. This system worked well enough while the founders lived, but it could not survive their deaths. Their successors, lacking the founders' personal authority and the relationships that had made collective governance possible, needed a different structure.</p>

  <p>The first non-founder head of Hogwarts was, according to the most commonly accepted reconstruction, a wizard named Everard the Earnest. Everard had been a student of Hufflepuff and had served as a senior teacher at the school for many years before the last founder's death. His claim to leadership rested on seniority and on his reputation for fairness; he was acceptable to the surviving partisans of all four houses precisely because he was not strongly identified with any one. Everard served as head for approximately three decades, during which he established many of the traditions that would define the position.</p>

  <p>The title "Headmaster" or "Headmistress" did not come into use until later; Everard was known simply as "the Head" or, more formally, "the Head of the School." The current title, implying authority over a staff of subordinate masters, reflects the later development of a formal faculty structure. In Everard's time, teachers were not yet organised into a clear hierarchy; he was first among equals rather than a superior commanding subordinates.</p>

  <p>Selection methods for the headship have varied considerably across the centuries. Everard was chosen by informal consensus among the senior teachers. Later heads were sometimes chosen by the outgoing head, designated as successors during their predecessor's lifetime. Still later, the Board of Governors claimed the right to appoint the head, a claim that has been contested but is now generally accepted. The Ministry of Magic has occasionally attempted to influence appointments, with varying success; overt Ministry control of the position has been resisted, though subtle influence is harder to detect and resist.</p>

  <p>The powers of the Headmaster are extensive but not unlimited. Within the school, the Headmaster's authority is nearly absolute: determining curriculum, appointing staff, disciplining students, managing finances, representing the school in external relations. But the Headmaster is accountable to the Board of Governors and, at least theoretically, to the broader wizarding community whose children the school educates. Headmasters who have overstepped their authority have been removed; the position is powerful but not invulnerable.</p>

  <p>The Headmaster's office occupies a tower added in 1762 specifically to house the position's growing administrative apparatus. The office is reached by a moving spiral staircase, accessed through a gargoyle that guards the entrance. Within, the office contains the collected curiosities of centuries of heads: magical instruments, artifacts, and oddments that successive occupants have acquired and bequeathed to their successors. The office also contains the portraits of former headmasters and headmistresses, a gallery of predecessors who can offer advice, criticism, and perspective to the current occupant.</p>

  <p>The headmaster portraits represent a unique feature of the position. When a headmaster dies, their portrait, if painted during their lifetime, awakens and joins the gallery. These portraits retain something of their subjects' personalities and memories, though degraded and incomplete. They can advise the current head, provide historical context, and serve as intermediaries with portraits elsewhere in the castle. Some heads have relied heavily on their predecessors' guidance; others have found the constant commentary more annoying than helpful. The portraits remain regardless, an inescapable feature of the office.</p>

  <p>Notable heads are surveyed in Book IV. Here I note only that the position has attracted individuals of widely varying ability and character. Some heads have been brilliant educators who transformed the school. Others have been competent administrators who maintained established traditions. A few have been disasters, their tenures marked by scandal, corruption, or outright malevolence. The position itself does not guarantee the quality of its occupant; it merely provides a platform on which that quality, whatever it may be, can manifest.</p>

</body>
</html>