<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 3: The Meeting</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <p class="chapter-number">Chapter Three</p>
  <h2>The Meeting</h2>

  <p class="first">How did the four founders find each other? The question has inspired more romantic invention than perhaps any other in magical history. The tavern myth, in which four strangers happen to share a table at a wayside inn and discover their common purpose over flagons of mead, appears in sources no earlier than the fourteenth century and bears all the hallmarks of retrospective myth-making. It is a good story. It is almost certainly not true.</p>

  <p>The tavern narrative assumes that the founders were strangers before their meeting, drawn together by chance or destiny. But several earlier sources suggest a more prosaic reality: the founders, or at least some of them, already knew each other. The friendship between Gryffindor and Slytherin predates the founding by at least a decade, according to references in the Sorting Hat's earliest recorded songs. Hufflepuff and Ravenclaw may have been related by blood: a fragmentary genealogical record from the twelfth century lists them as cousins, though this may represent an attempt by the recorder's family to claim descent from both founders through a single connection.</p>

  <p>The theory that has gained the most scholarly acceptance in recent decades proposes that the founders first came together, or at least first conceived their project, at what sources call the Magical Symposium of 976. This gathering, held somewhere in the Midlands at a location that has never been identified, brought together magical practitioners from across Britain to discuss matters of common concern. The date is significant: it falls during a period of relative peace in the island's political history, when such a gathering would have been feasible.</p>

  <p>The Symposium theory is attractive because it explains how four individuals from different regions, practicing different magical traditions, could have found common ground. A formal gathering dedicated to magical discussion would have provided the context for the founders to recognise their shared concerns about magical education, to debate possible solutions, and to discover their complementary abilities. The theory remains unproven, but it has the merit of plausibility where the tavern myth has only narrative appeal.</p>

  <p>An alternative theory suggests that the founders did not all come together at once but rather accumulated gradually. In this telling, Gryffindor and Slytherin, already friends and already concerned about the state of magical education, began planning a school and then recruited Ravenclaw and Hufflepuff for their specific abilities: Ravenclaw for her intellectual brilliance and educational philosophy, Hufflepuff for her practical skills and her radical commitment to universal instruction. This theory has the merit of explaining why the founders divided responsibilities as they did, but it has difficulty accounting for the apparently equal status the four enjoyed in the finished institution.</p>

  <p>The question of what drew them together is perhaps more answerable than the question of how. By the late tenth century, the crisis in magical education had become impossible for thoughtful witches and wizards to ignore. The mortality rate among untrained magical children was rising. Muggle persecution was increasing. Ancient magical knowledge was being lost with every generation as masters died without passing on their secrets. Any one of the founders, surveying this landscape, would have recognised the need for change. That four of them, independently or in concert, arrived at the same solution, a residential school, reflects both the severity of the crisis and the limited range of possible responses.</p>

  <p>The surviving fragments of the Hogwarts founding documents suggest that the project was not the founders' first attempt at educational reform. References to "earlier ventures" and "failed beginnings" indicate that the founders, individually or collectively, had tried other approaches before settling on the Hogwarts model. What these earlier ventures entailed and why they failed is not recorded. Perhaps they were smaller in scale, local apprenticeship programs that could not survive the death of their organisers. Perhaps they were attempts at collaboration with other witches and wizards who proved unsuitable partners. The founders who created Hogwarts had learned from failure; they were not starry-eyed idealists but experienced practitioners who understood how difficult their task would be.</p>

  <p>The founding charter, reconstructed from fragments and later copies, suggests that the four shared certain core principles despite their differences. All agreed that magical education should be systematic rather than haphazard. All agreed that it should be residential, removing students from environments where their magic might cause harm or attract dangerous attention. All agreed that it should be protected from interference, whether by Muggle authorities, magical feuds, or the political conflicts that periodically convulsed wizarding society. These agreements formed the foundation upon which Hogwarts was built.</p>

  <p>The disagreements would come later, as they always do when principles meet practice. The question of which students to admit, of how to sort them, of what to teach and how: these would prove more divisive than the founders perhaps anticipated. But in the beginning, there was consensus. Four witches and wizards, each the most distinguished practitioner of their region and tradition, came together in a shared conviction that something must be done. However they met, whatever their prior relationships, this consensus was their true starting point. The school began as an agreement.</p>

</body>
</html>