<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 34: The Whomping Willow</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <p class="chapter-number">Chapter Thirty-Four</p>
  <h2>The Whomping Willow</h2>

  <p class="first">The Whomping Willow is a recent addition to the Hogwarts grounds, planted within living memory and therefore subject to less uncertainty than most features of the school. Yet despite its recent arrival, the Willow has acquired an air of mystery that older features often lack. The circumstances of its planting, officially described as decorative, have prompted considerable speculation among students and historians alike.</p>

  <p>The Whomping Willow was planted in the 1960s, during the headmastership of Albus Dumbledore. The official explanation, that the tree was acquired to enhance the aesthetic diversity of the grounds, has never been found convincing by anyone who has encountered the Willow. Whomping Willows are not decorative in any conventional sense. They are violent, dangerous trees that attack anything that comes within reach of their branches. A school that prioritises student safety would seem an unlikely venue for such a specimen.</p>

  <p>The passage beneath the Willow, leading to a building in Hogsmeade known as the Shrieking Shack, was constructed simultaneously with the tree's planting. The tunnel's existence is not widely known, though it has been discovered by students on several occasions. The tunnel's purpose, like the tree's, has never been officially explained. The Shrieking Shack itself, which earned its name from strange sounds that emanated from it for several years after the tree was planted, has been abandoned for decades and is generally considered haunted.</p>

  <p>The connection between the Willow, the tunnel, and the Shrieking Shack has been the subject of considerable speculation. The most common theory holds that all three were created to accommodate a specific student whose condition required periodic isolation from the rest of the school. What this condition might have been is not specified in any document I have been able to access. The classification surrounding the matter suggests that the truth is considered sensitive even decades after the fact.</p>

  <p>Injuries from the Whomping Willow have occurred regularly since its planting. Students, drawn by curiosity or dared by their peers, have approached too closely and been struck by the thrashing branches. Most such injuries have been minor, though several have required extended hospital wing stays. The school has erected warnings, imposed punishments on students who approach the tree, and periodically considered removing it entirely. Yet the Willow remains, protected, one suspects, by whatever purpose necessitated its planting in the first place.</p>

  <p>The method for safely passing the Willow, touching a knot at the base of its trunk that freezes the branches, was apparently built into the tree's enchantments from the beginning. This method is not widely known, but it has been discovered independently by several students over the years. Its existence suggests that whoever planted the Willow expected the tunnel beneath it to be used regularly, requiring safe passage that the random stranger would not be able to achieve.</p>

  <p>Why the Willow remains despite the danger has never been satisfactorily explained. The usual answer, that it is a valuable specimen of a rare species, is transparently inadequate. Whomping Willows are not so rare that one specimen is irreplaceable, and the species' magical properties do not require the tree to be located on school grounds where it can injure students. The true reason, whatever it is, has been kept confidential by successive headmasters.</p>

  <p>The groundskeeper bears primary responsibility for Willow maintenance, a task that requires considerable courage and skill. Pruning must be done quickly, between the moment when the immobilising knot is pressed and the moment when the tree recovers mobility. The groundskeeper has reportedly developed considerable expertise in Willow-related activities and has the scars to prove it. His discretion regarding the tree's origins has been, like that of the headmasters, complete.</p>

  <p>Student fascination with the Willow continues unabated despite the dangers. First-years are warned about it during orientation; this warning seems only to increase their interest. The tree has become a rite of passage of sorts: approaching it, ideally without being injured, demonstrates courage or foolhardiness depending on perspective. The school officially discourages such behaviour. The behaviour continues. The Willow waits, branches ready, for the next student who ventures too close.</p>

</body>
</html>