<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 26: Quidditch at Hogwarts</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <p class="chapter-number">Chapter Twenty-Six</p>
  <h2>Quidditch at Hogwarts</h2>

  <p class="first">Quidditch was not invented at Hogwarts, but Hogwarts has done more than any other institution to develop, popularise, and standardise the sport. The inter-house Quidditch competition is, for many students, the defining feature of their Hogwarts experience, the activity that inspires more passion, more loyalty, and more controversy than any academic subject could dream of matching.</p>

  <p>The game originated in the marshlands of Queerditch Marsh, perhaps a hundred miles from Hogwarts, sometime in the eleventh century. The early game bore only passing resemblance to modern Quidditch: players chased a leather ball while flying on broomsticks, trying to throw it through hoops. The multiple balls, the elaborate rules, and the Seeker position that makes the modern game so distinctive developed over subsequent centuries through a process of experimentation and gradual standardisation.</p>

  <p>Quidditch came to Hogwarts in the early twelfth century, introduced by students who had played the game at home. The first matches were informal, disorganised affairs played on whatever open ground was available. The school authorities initially viewed the game with suspicion, concerned about injuries and the distraction from studies. But the game's popularity proved irresistible, and by 1150 the school had accepted Quidditch as a sanctioned activity.</p>

  <p>The first dedicated pitch was constructed around 1200, a simple oval of cleared ground with makeshift goalposts. The pitch was gradually improved over the centuries: the goalposts were standardised, spectator seating was added, and the playing area was enlarged to accommodate the evolving game. The current pitch, with its towering stands and professional-quality facilities, was built in 1821 and has been renovated several times since.</p>

  <p>The inter-house competition was formalised in the thirteenth century with the institution of the Quidditch Cup, awarded annually to the house that accumulated the most points across the season's matches. The competition transformed house rivalry, channeling it into athletic contest. Matches became events that united houses in collective emotion, joy or despair depending on the outcome. The Quidditch Cup joined the House Cup as a prize worth fighting for.</p>

  <p>Famous matches across Hogwarts history are too numerous to catalogue fully. The legendary 1357 final, which lasted three days before the Ravenclaw Seeker finally caught the Snitch, remains the longest match in school history. The 1612 match between Gryffindor and Slytherin, played during the Goblin Rebellion while the school was under partial siege, demonstrated that Quidditch would continue even in the direst circumstances. The 1899 match in which a Hufflepuff Beater accidentally hit the spectator stands, injuring the Headmaster, prompted significant safety reforms.</p>

  <p>The rules of Quidditch have been modified repeatedly, often in response to injuries or controversies. The ban on hitting Bludgers at spectators, for instance, was instituted in 1473 after several serious incidents. The current regulations on broomstick specifications date to 1883, when improvements in racing broom technology threatened to make the game a simple equipment competition. The Snitch's enchantments have been modified several times to prevent matches from ending too quickly or lasting too long.</p>

  <p>Injuries remain a significant concern despite all safety measures. Broken bones are common; more serious injuries occur every few years. The school maintains a dedicated Quidditch casualty response capability, and the hospital wing has protocols specifically for match-day incidents. Deaths on the pitch are rare but not unknown; the last fatality at Hogwarts occurred in 1782, when a Beater was struck in the head by a Bludger at close range. Each death has prompted safety reviews, but the fundamental danger of the game persists.</p>

  <p>The Quidditch Cup tradition has created its own subsidiary institutions: the house teams with their captains and training schedules, the tryouts that allow new players to join, the complex statistics that devoted fans maintain across generations. Quidditch has become a culture within Hogwarts culture, with its own heroes, villains, and legends. Students who will never play themselves nonetheless identify passionately with their house teams, attending matches, cheering and mourning, and passing their loyalties to succeeding generations. The game continues. The passion endures.</p>

</body>
</html>