<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 8: Slytherin's Departure</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <p class="chapter-number">Chapter Eight</p>
  <h2>Slytherin's Departure</h2>

  <p class="first">The departure of Salazar Slytherin from Hogwarts is the most controversial event in the school's history, and also, perhaps inevitably, the most obscured by subsequent polemic. Every account of the event carries the weight of centuries of interpretation. Slytherin's champions have portrayed him as a principled defender of wizarding security, driven out by naive colleagues who could not see the danger of Muggle-born admissions. His detractors have cast him as a bigot whose departure purified the school of his malign influence. Neither caricature serves historical understanding.</p>

  <p>The traditional narrative, codified by Adalbert Waffling and repeated in most subsequent accounts, holds that Slytherin wished to exclude Muggle-born students entirely from Hogwarts and that the other founders' refusal to accept this position led to his departure. This narrative has the merit of simplicity and the support of most surviving sources. But it may be too simple. The portrait testimonies, fragmentary and contradictory as they are, suggest a more complicated situation.</p>

  <p>The portrait of Everard, who lived only two centuries after the founding and whose memories are therefore more reliable than many, describes the dispute as "not merely about blood but about trust, and not merely about trust but about love gone sour." This suggests a personal dimension to the conflict that purely ideological accounts miss. The friendship between Gryffindor and Slytherin, well attested in earlier sources, appears to have collapsed around this time, and the collapse may have preceded rather than followed the policy dispute.</p>

  <p>The blood purity question itself requires contextualisation. Slytherin's documented position was that Muggle-born students represented a security risk: their families might discover the school's location and reveal it to hostile authorities. In an era of increasing Muggle persecution, this concern was not irrational. The question is whether it was genuine or whether the security argument masked a pre-existing prejudice. The surviving evidence does not permit a definitive answer.</p>

  <p>What the evidence does suggest is that Slytherin's departure was not the dramatic rupture that legend has made it. The portrait of Dilys Derwent, drawing on traditions she heard from earlier portraits, describes a "gradual withdrawal" over several years. Slytherin apparently reduced his involvement in teaching, spent increasing time away from the castle, and eventually stopped returning altogether. This is less satisfying narratively than the image of a final confrontation, but it may be closer to the truth.</p>

  <p>The Chamber of Secrets legend is inextricably connected to Slytherin's departure. The tradition holds that Slytherin, before leaving, constructed a hidden chamber somewhere in the castle, containing a monster that would one day "purge the school" of those he deemed unworthy. This legend is examined in detail in Book IV; here I will note only that the earliest references to the Chamber postdate Slytherin's departure by several centuries and that the founder himself left no record of such a construction. The Chamber may exist; it may not. But its connection to Slytherin's departure is a matter of legend rather than documented history.</p>

  <p>Slytherin's life after Hogwarts is largely unknown. He disappears from reliable sources after his departure, surfacing only in legends and genealogical claims that may or may not be accurate. Some traditions hold that he returned to his birthplace, wherever that was; others that he travelled abroad; still others that he founded alternative magical schools that did not survive. The scarcity of information has allowed generations of writers to project whatever they wished onto his later years. We simply do not know what became of him.</p>

  <p>The effect of Slytherin's departure on the remaining founders is easier to trace. The school continued to function, but the loss of one of its four pillars left visible strain. Gryffindor, according to several sources, fell into a period of melancholy that affected his teaching. Ravenclaw and Hufflepuff assumed additional responsibilities to compensate for Slytherin's absence. The house that bore his name faced suspicion and resentment from the other houses, a dynamic that persists, in attenuated form, to this day.</p>

  <p>How Slytherin House survived its founder's disgrace is itself a question worth considering. The other founders might have abolished it, redistributing its students among the remaining houses. They chose not to. This decision suggests either a lingering respect for Slytherin's contributions to the school or a recognition that the house had developed its own identity independent of its founder. The students who remained in Slytherin after his departure were not responsible for his views; punishing them by eliminating their house would have been unjust. The house remained, and over the centuries it has produced graduates both noble and notorious, as have all the houses. Slytherin's legacy is complicated. So is his house's.</p>

</body>
</html>