<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 12: The Room of Requirement</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <p class="chapter-number">Chapter Twelve</p>
  <h2>The Room of Requirement</h2>

  <p class="first">The Room of Requirement may be the most remarkable space in Hogwarts, and it is certainly the most difficult to study. A room that appears only when needed, that takes whatever form the seeker requires, that may not exist at all between uses: such a room defies the historian's standard methods. One cannot examine what one cannot reliably locate.</p>

  <p>The earliest known reference to the Room appears in the diary of a house-elf named Binky, dating to approximately 1457. Binky describes discovering "the room that comes and goes" while searching for a place to store damaged furniture. The room appeared before her filled with broken chairs and tables, exactly what she needed. When she returned the next day with more furniture, the room was gone, the corridor wall blank and solid. She eventually learned to summon it by walking past the relevant stretch of wall three times while concentrating on her need.</p>

  <p>This method of access, walking thrice past the wall while focusing on what is required, has been confirmed by every subsequent account. The room manifests as a door that was not there before, opening onto a space configured for the seeker's specific need. Students seeking a place to study have found a quiet library. Those seeking a bathroom have found exactly that. Those seeking a place to hide contraband have found a vast storehouse filled with the hidden objects of generations of students before them.</p>

  <p>The theories of the Room's origin are numerous and contradictory. The most common holds that it was created by the founders, probably Ravenclaw, as a kind of ultimate utility space. This theory is attractive but lacks documentary support; no founder-era source mentions the Room. An alternative theory suggests that the Room is older than the castle itself, a feature of the site that the founders incorporated rather than created. This would align with the evidence of ancient magical use at the Hogwarts location, though it requires believing that the Room somehow adapted to its incorporation into the castle.</p>

  <p>A third theory, favoured by some magical theorists, proposes that the Room is not a discrete creation but an emergent property of the castle itself. According to this view, Hogwarts has accumulated enough magical energy over its millennium of existence that it has developed a kind of responsiveness to need. The Room is simply the most dramatic manifestation of this responsiveness, a space where the castle's desire to provide for its inhabitants achieves physical form. This theory has implications for the question of castle sentience discussed in Chapter 18.</p>

  <p>The Room's apparent limitations are themselves revealing. Multiple reliable accounts confirm that the Room cannot produce food; seekers who require nourishment find the Room equipped with plates and utensils but nothing to eat. This aligns with Gamp's Law of Elemental Transfiguration, which holds that food cannot be created from nothing, suggesting that the Room operates within normal magical constraints rather than somehow transcending them. The Room also cannot produce permanent exits from the castle; those seeking escape routes have found doors that lead only back into the castle itself.</p>

  <p>Whether multiple users can access the Room simultaneously, and if so whether they access the same space, remains disputed. Some accounts suggest that the Room can be in use by different seekers at the same time, each finding their own version of the space. Other accounts describe seekers unable to access the Room because someone else was using it. The inconsistency may reflect different modes of the Room's operation, or it may simply reflect the unreliability of accounts concerning a space that is itself unreliable.</p>

  <p>The Room of Requirement has served countless purposes across the centuries. Students have used it for study, for romance, for forbidden dueling practice, and for storing objects they wished to hide. Staff have used it for storage, for private meetings, and, in at least one documented case, for a secret passage out of the castle during a crisis. The castle's headmasters have generally declined to acknowledge the Room's existence officially, perhaps fearing that widespread knowledge would lead to overuse or misuse. Yet the Room is hardly a secret; it appears in student folklore at every generation, rediscovered by each new cohort of seekers.</p>

  <p>House-elf tradition provides the richest lore concerning the Room. The elves call it the "Come and Go Room" and use it regularly for storage and other purposes. They speak of it with a matter-of-fact familiarity that suggests long acquaintance, and their accounts provide much of what we know about the Room's capabilities and limitations. That the earliest written reference to the Room comes from an elf diary is appropriate; the elves knew the castle's secrets long before human historians thought to ask.</p>

</body>
</html>