<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 10: Architectural Overview</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <p class="chapter-number">Chapter Ten</p>
  <h2>Architectural Overview</h2>

  <p class="first">Hogwarts Castle defies conventional architectural analysis. It is not a building so much as a palimpsest, a manuscript on which a thousand years of magical construction have written and overwritten and written again. The castle that students walk today bears only partial resemblance to what the founders built, yet the founders' work remains visible beneath layers of modification, like old ink bleeding through parchment. To understand Hogwarts, one must learn to read its layers.</p>

  <p>The core founder-era construction centres on what is now the Great Hall, the entrance hall, and the four house common rooms. These spaces show the characteristic stonework of tenth-century magical building: massive blocks fitted with such precision that mortar was unnecessary, their joints sealed instead by charm work that has held for a millennium. The founder-era stones are distinct from later additions if you know what to look for. They carry a magical signature that can be detected with appropriate spells, a resonance of the founders' power still vibrating faintly after all these centuries.</p>

  <p>The castle has undergone seven documented major expansions since the founding. The first, approximately 1150, added the hospital wing and extended the dungeon complex. The second, around 1280, created the Astronomy Tower in something like its present form. The third expansion, 1350-1380, added the library and several classroom spaces. The fourth, 1520, rebuilt portions of the castle damaged in the Dark wizard Ekrizdis's assault. The fifth, 1620-1650, expanded the dormitories to accommodate a growing student body. The sixth, 1762, significantly enlarged the Headmaster's office and quarters. The seventh, 1890, added the greenhouses and expanded the Herbology facilities.</p>

  <p>Between these major expansions, countless smaller modifications have occurred. Rooms have been added, removed, combined, and divided. Passages have been created and forgotten. Entire wings have been walled off during periods of reduced enrollment and reopened generations later. The cumulative effect is a castle that resists mapping. Floor plans drawn in one century are obsolete by the next, and plans drawn in one decade may be inaccurate by the following year.</p>

  <p>The castle's various sections reflect the architectural fashions of their eras. The founder-era construction shows the stark functionality of early medieval magical building: massive, defensive, built for survival rather than beauty. The twelfth-century additions incorporate Romanesque elements, probably influenced by magical architects who had studied Muggle cathedrals. The fourteenth-century work shows Gothic influences: pointed arches, ribbed vaults, and a new interest in light and verticality. Later sections reflect Renaissance, Baroque, and even Victorian sensibilities, each generation leaving its mark on the structure.</p>

  <p>This stylistic diversity might have produced an architectural disaster, a hodgepodge of clashing elements with no coherent identity. That Hogwarts instead manages to feel unified, despite its patchwork construction, suggests either careful planning by successive architects or something more mysterious: the castle's own preferences shaping the additions made to it. This question, whether Hogwarts possesses some form of consciousness, is examined in Chapter 18.</p>

  <p>The castle's footprint presents a peculiar challenge to any attempt at measurement. Hogwarts is, quite simply, larger inside than outside. This is not unusual for magical buildings; most wizarding homes employ some degree of spatial expansion. But the degree to which Hogwarts exceeds its apparent boundaries is remarkable. Measurements taken from the grounds suggest a castle of perhaps two hundred thousand square feet. Measurements taken inside, insofar as such measurements are possible in a structure that shifts, suggest interior space approaching a million square feet. The ratio has increased over time, as successive expansions added interior space without proportionally increasing the exterior profile. The castle's outer walls have not significantly changed since the founder era, yet the interior has grown perhaps fivefold.</p>

  <p>The magical engineering required to maintain such spatial distortion is considerable. Lesser buildings with significant interior expansion require constant magical maintenance; allow the enchantments to degrade, and the building will attempt to reconcile its conflicting geometries, usually catastrophically. That Hogwarts has maintained its expansion for a millennium without collapse suggests either extraordinarily robust foundational magic or an ongoing maintenance regime that has not been publicly documented. Some historians have speculated that the castle itself performs this maintenance, adjusting its own enchantments as needed. Others attribute it to the house-elves. The truth is unknown.</p>

</body>
</html>