<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 14: The Dungeons</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <p class="chapter-number">Chapter Fourteen</p>
  <h2>The Dungeons</h2>

  <p class="first">The Hogwarts dungeons extend far beneath the castle proper, a complex of chambers, corridors, and passages that may rival the above-ground structure in total volume. Slytherin designed the original dungeon system; subsequent centuries have expanded it considerably, though the original layout remains detectable to those who know how to look. The dungeons are darker, damper, and colder than the rest of the castle, qualities that some find oppressive and others find atmospheric.</p>

  <p>Slytherin's original design served primarily defensive purposes. The dungeons were intended as a refuge of last resort, a place where the entire school population could shelter if the upper castle fell to attackers. The corridors were designed to be easily defensible, with narrow passages, multiple dead ends, and concealed chambers where defenders could ambush invaders. The deepest levels contained stores of food and water sufficient for months of siege. Whether these preparations were ever needed is not recorded; no attacker in Hogwarts' history has penetrated to the dungeon's depths.</p>

  <p>The Potions classroom has occupied dungeon space since the founder era, though its specific location has changed several times. The choice of the dungeons for Potions instruction reflects practical considerations: the cool, constant temperature helps stabilise volatile ingredients; the stone walls contain accidental explosions better than wood; and students overcome by fumes can be moved to higher ground, where ventilation is better. Slytherin himself taught Potions in these chambers, establishing a tradition that his house has claimed, with some justification, as ancestral right.</p>

  <p>The Slytherin common room occupies a portion of the dungeons directly beneath the Black Lake. The room's outer wall is, in fact, a vast window onto the lake's depths, through which students can observe the underwater world: the waving weeds, the darting fish, and occasionally the giant squid pressing a curious tentacle against the glass. This remarkable feature appears to date from the original construction; Slytherin apparently enchanted the wall to transparency while maintaining its structural integrity and its ability to keep out the water. The green-tinged light that filters through the lake gives the common room its distinctive ambiance.</p>

  <p>Access to the Slytherin common room requires a password, a security measure that dates to the founder era. The password system is administered by a portrait of a serpent, now so old and faded that it is nearly invisible against the stone wall. The passwords themselves have been preserved in some cases; a list compiled in the eighteenth century records such passwords as "purity," "power," and "preservation," themes that reveal the house's evolving self-image. Modern passwords are known only to current students and staff.</p>

  <p>Beyond the common room and the Potions classrooms, the dungeons contain numerous other spaces. Storage chambers hold supplies and equipment accumulated over centuries. Detention rooms, now disused, once housed students serving punishments in the dark. A series of cells, barred and windowless, suggest that the dungeons were used at some point to hold prisoners, though records of such use have not survived. These darker chambers are generally off-limits to students, though determined explorers have reached them.</p>

  <p>Persistent rumours hold that the dungeons contain levels deeper than any official map acknowledges. These rumours connect, inevitably, to the Chamber of Secrets legend, which places Slytherin's hidden chamber somewhere in the dungeon complex. Whether such deeper levels exist cannot be determined; the dungeons are extensive enough that unexplored regions certainly remain, and the castle's tendency toward spatial expansion makes it possible that new chambers have appeared over the centuries. The Chamber of Secrets itself is discussed in Book IV. Here I note only that the dungeons' reputation for concealing secrets has ancient roots and continues to fuel student imagination.</p>

  <p>The dungeons' atmosphere has shaped the character of Slytherin house in ways that are difficult to quantify but impossible to ignore. Students who live beneath the earth, lit by green lakelight, surrounded by cool stone, develop a different relationship with their environment than students who live in airy towers. Whether this difference explains anything about Slytherin house's distinctive traits is debatable. But the dungeons are undeniably their home, have been for a millennium, and that home has left its mark on every student who has called it theirs.</p>

</body>
</html>