<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 1: Magical Britain Before Hogwarts</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <p class="chapter-number">Chapter One</p>
  <h2>Magical Britain Before Hogwarts</h2>

  <p class="first">To understand why Hogwarts was founded, one must first understand what came before it: a magical Britain that was, by modern standards, almost unimaginably fragmented, dangerous, and precarious. The wizarding world of the early medieval period bore little resemblance to the organised society we know today. There was no Ministry of Magic, no Statute of Secrecy, no standardised curriculum or qualification system. There were only families, scattered across the isles, each preserving what magical knowledge they could and hoping their children would survive long enough to pass it on.</p>

  <p>Magical education in this era was an entirely domestic affair. A witch or wizard learned magic from their parents, grandparents, or, if fortunate, a more powerful relative willing to take them on as an apprentice. The quality of this education varied enormously. Ancient magical families with unbroken traditions stretching back to Roman Britain might produce children of considerable skill, trained in disciplines long since lost to modern practice. A first-generation magical child born to Muggle parents, by contrast, faced a grim calculus: discover their abilities by accident, attract the attention of a willing teacher, or quite possibly die.</p>

  <p>The mortality rate among untrained magical children was appalling. Accidental magic, which we now understand as a natural developmental phase, killed or maimed thousands before the founding of formal magical education. A child who could not control her accidental Apparition might splinch herself fatally. A boy whose temper manifested as uncontrolled fire might burn down his village and himself with it. Even those who survived their own magic often fell victim to others: Muggles who recognised them as dangerous, or less scrupulous witches and wizards who saw in untrained magical children either threats to be eliminated or resources to be exploited.</p>

  <p>The apprenticeship system, where it existed, provided some relief, but it was neither universal nor reliable. A master might take on a promising student only to die before completing their training. The knowledge passed was often incomplete, jealously guarded, or simply wrong. Different regions developed different magical traditions, some sophisticated and some frankly dangerous. The hedge-witches of Cornwall practiced a form of earth magic largely incompatible with the wand-based spellwork of the East Anglian wizards. The Scottish magical families had preserved certain Norse traditions brought by Viking settlers, including runic magic that the southern English wizards viewed with suspicion. Ireland maintained its own distinct practices, as did Wales. There was no common magical language, no shared body of knowledge, no agreement even on fundamental principles of magical theory.</p>

  <p>This fragmentation had consequences beyond education. Magical feuds, unmediated by any central authority, could persist for generations. The Selwyn-Shafiq conflict, which began in the eighth century over a disputed magical inheritance and continued until the Ministry finally intervened in 1694, claimed an estimated three hundred lives over nine centuries. Such feuds were not unusual. They were simply how disputes were settled in a world without magical law.</p>

  <p>The relationship between magical and Muggle populations in this period was considerably more complex than the simple division we know today. While certain wizarding families maintained strict separation from their Muggle neighbours, many others lived in a state of uneasy integration. The village witch, the cunning man, the healer whose remedies worked rather better than they should: these figures were common throughout medieval Britain. Some Muggles knew perfectly well that magic was real. They had seen it, benefited from it, or suffered under it. The concept of magical secrecy as an absolute principle would have struck them as absurd.</p>

  <p>Yet this integration was growing more dangerous by the late tenth century. The Christianisation of Britain, complete by this period, had introduced new theological frameworks for understanding magic. Where a pagan Muggle might have seen a witch as a useful neighbour possessed of unusual gifts, a Christian Muggle was increasingly likely to see her as a servant of the Devil. The persecution that would eventually drive wizardkind into hiding was already beginning, manifested in sporadic violence, ecclesiastical investigations, and a growing climate of suspicion. Wise magical families began to consider concealment not as preference but as necessity.</p>

  <p>It was into this world, dangerous, fragmented, and darkening, that the four founders were born. Each, in their own region and tradition, would come to recognise the same fundamental problem: magical society could not survive as it was. Something had to change. The scattered apprenticeship system could not preserve magical knowledge against the losses of war, feud, and persecution. The isolation of magical families from one another was breeding ignorance and enmity. The lack of any common training was making magical Britain weak precisely when strength was needed most.</p>

  <p>The founders, solution, a residential school where young witches and wizards could be trained together, was not entirely without precedent. Magical education on the continent had already begun to consolidate. The Beauxbatons Academy, though it would not achieve its current form for another two centuries, had roots in Carolingian-era magical training programs. Durmstrang Institute claims founding dates even earlier, though their records are notoriously unreliable. What made Hogwarts distinctive was not the idea of a magical school but the scale of its ambition: a single institution that would serve all of magical Britain, transcending regional traditions, family feuds, and blood status prejudices.</p>

  <p>Whether the founders fully understood what they were attempting is impossible to say. They may have envisioned something much smaller, a joint apprenticeship program that grew beyond their initial intentions. They may have dreamed, from the first, of the castle that would eventually rise in the Scottish Highlands. The surviving documents do not tell us. What they do tell us is that four extraordinary individuals, born into a world of chaos and danger, somehow found each other and decided to build something better. The chapters that follow will examine who they were, how they came together, and what they created. But the reader should keep in mind the world they were trying to save: a magical Britain on the edge of catastrophe, where knowledge was dying and children with it, where the Muggle world was growing hostile and wizarding society had no answer. Hogwarts was not merely a school. It was a desperate act of preservation. That it succeeded beyond all reasonable expectation is the story this book exists to tell.</p>

</body>
</html>