<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 7: The First Years</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <p class="chapter-number">Chapter Seven</p>
  <h2>The First Years</h2>

  <p class="first">The inaugural class of Hogwarts numbered perhaps two dozen students, though records are too fragmentary to permit certainty. They came from across Britain: children of established magical families who had heard of the founders' project and saw in it an opportunity for their offspring, Muggle-born children whom the founders had personally identified and recruited, and a few apprentices whom the founders had already been training and brought with them to the new school. These first students were pioneers, though they could not have known it. The traditions they established, often by accident, would shape the institution for centuries.</p>

  <p>Recruitment in the early years appears to have been haphazard by modern standards. There was no registry of magical births, no systematic method for identifying children with magical potential. The founders relied on their own networks, on reports from allied witches and wizards across the country, and on instances of accidental magic dramatic enough to attract attention. Muggle-born students were particularly difficult to identify and recruit; many such children were lost to detection failure, their magic manifesting too subtly to be noticed or suppressed so thoroughly by frightened parents that it never manifested at all.</p>

  <p>The early curriculum was considerably more combat-focused than modern students might expect. The founders lived in a dangerous world. Muggle persecution was increasing, magical feuds were common, and students needed to be able to defend themselves. Dueling was taught as a core subject, alongside more academic pursuits. Gryffindor himself reportedly taught combat magic, demonstrating techniques that students would need if they encountered hostile wizards or Muggle mobs after leaving school. This martial emphasis declined in later centuries as the wizarding world became more secure, but it shaped the school's character in ways that persist today.</p>

  <p>The founders taught personally, each taking responsibility for subjects aligned with their expertise. Ravenclaw taught Charms and what would later be called Transfiguration, though the disciplines were less clearly distinguished in her era. Slytherin taught Potions and defensive magic. Hufflepuff focused on Herbology and healing arts. Gryffindor taught combat magic and, according to some sources, early forms of what would become Astronomy. This division of responsibilities established a pattern that influenced curriculum organisation for centuries, even after the founders' deaths and the hiring of specialist professors.</p>

  <p>Student life in the early castle was rougher than modern students would find acceptable. Dormitories were less well-heated, food was simpler, and the castle itself was still incomplete in many areas. Students were expected to contribute to the school's maintenance, helping with cleaning, cooking, and even construction. The distinction between students and servants, so clear in modern Hogwarts, was less marked in the founder era. Everyone worked. The house-elves who now handle domestic tasks would not arrive until three centuries later.</p>

  <p>House identity began to form almost immediately, though it took different shapes than later tradition would assume. Students naturally gravitated toward the founders who had selected them, seeking additional instruction and mentorship. Gryffindor's students developed a reputation for boldness; Ravenclaw's for scholarship; Slytherin's for ambition; Hufflepuff's for a certain stubborn diligence. These reputations, initially based on the founders' selection criteria, became self-reinforcing as students strove to embody their house's values and new students were sorted partly on their desire to belong to a particular group.</p>

  <p>Relations with the local Muggle population were more frequent than later eras would permit. The Statute of Secrecy lay seven centuries in the future, and the founders saw no need to hide entirely from their Muggle neighbours. Local villagers knew that something was happening in the castle; rumours circulated of a monastery or a nobleman's fortress. Some trade occurred: the school purchased supplies that could not be conjured, and local craftsmen occasionally provided services. This contact would diminish over the centuries as the wizarding world withdrew increasingly into secrecy, but in the founder era, Hogwarts was not yet invisible to the world around it.</p>

  <p>The school's early reputation spread through the wizarding world with remarkable speed. Within a generation of its founding, Hogwarts was recognised as the premier magical educational institution in Britain, surpassing the informal apprenticeship systems it had been designed to supplement. Students who graduated from Hogwarts were better trained than their peers, more knowledgeable, more capable. The demand for places increased accordingly. By the time of the founders' deaths, the school had grown from its original two dozen students to several hundred, and a comprehensive curriculum had developed where four founders had once taught everything themselves.</p>

</body>
</html>