<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 30: Sieges and Attacks</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <p class="chapter-number">Chapter Thirty</p>
  <h2>Sieges and Attacks</h2>

  <p class="first">Hogwarts has been attacked numerous times over its millennium of existence. The castle's formidable defences have repelled most assaults, but some attackers have breached the outer wards, and a few have reached the castle itself. These incidents, while traumatic for those who lived through them, have also driven improvements in the school's protective systems, each attack revealing vulnerabilities that subsequent modifications addressed.</p>

  <p>The Siege of 1209 resulted from tragic miscommunication. A group of crusaders, returning from the Albigensian campaign in southern France and crossing Scotland en route to their homes in England, encountered the castle and mistook it for a heretic stronghold. The Muggle-repelling wards, which normally would have diverted them, may have been weakened by recent magical disturbances; alternatively, the crusaders may have included individuals with magical heritage who partially resisted the wards' effects. Whatever the cause, they perceived the castle as real and, fired by religious zeal, laid siege.</p>

  <p>The siege lasted three days. The crusaders could not breach the walls, but their presence prevented normal school operations and terrified students who had never seen such a large hostile force. The resolution came when the school's faculty, acting in concert, modified the castle's appearance to show a ruined, abandoned structure. The crusaders, concluding they had been deceived by some trick of light and terrain, withdrew. The incident prompted the strengthening of anti-Muggle protections and the establishment of protocols for responding to large-scale Muggle incursions.</p>

  <p>The assault by the dark wizard Raczidian in 1272 represented a more serious threat. Raczidian, a continental dark wizard of considerable power who had been conducting a campaign of terror across northern Europe, targeted Hogwarts specifically to demonstrate his ability to strike at the heart of British magical society. His assault breached the outer wards through a combination of raw power and exploited weaknesses in the defensive system.</p>

  <p>Raczidian's forces reached the Great Hall itself before being stopped. The battle that followed destroyed much of the Hall, including Ravenclaw's original ceiling enchantment. Raczidian himself was killed by the combined efforts of the Headmaster and several faculty members, but not before he had claimed over twenty lives, including three staff members and numerous students. The attack traumatised a generation and prompted the most comprehensive review of castle defences in the school's history to that point.</p>

  <p>The various goblin approaches during the periodic goblin rebellions have been more probing than assaulting. Goblins have generally not sought to destroy Hogwarts; their grievances have centred on the Ministry and on specific wizarding families rather than on the school as an institution. But the rebellions created dangers nonetheless. Goblin scouts have been detected within the castle's boundaries on several occasions, apparently reconnoitring rather than attacking. The 1612 rebellion saw goblin forces pass within miles of the school, creating anxiety that proved unnecessary; the goblins continued toward their Ministry targets without diverting to Hogwarts.</p>

  <p>The Ministry's attempted occupation in 1612, coinciding with the goblin rebellion and the student uprising of the same year, represents a different kind of threat: not external assault but internal interference. The Ministry, citing emergency powers necessitated by the rebellion, attempted to place the school under direct governmental control. Ministry agents arrived to take charge of the castle; the Headmaster refused to cede authority. The resulting standoff lasted three weeks before the Ministry backed down, its attention required elsewhere by the ongoing goblin conflict. The incident established an important precedent: Hogwarts was not subject to Ministry seizure, even in emergencies.</p>

  <p>Various dark wizard attacks have occurred throughout history, though most have been less dramatic than Raczidian's. Individual dark wizards, seeking revenge for perceived slights or simply wishing to demonstrate their power, have tested the castle's defences periodically. Most have been repelled at the boundaries. A few have penetrated further before being captured or killed. These incidents have generally received less attention than the major sieges, but collectively they have shaped the evolution of the ward system, each attacker revealing new vulnerabilities to be addressed.</p>

</body>
</html>