<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 27: Ghosts and Portraits</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <p class="chapter-number">Chapter Twenty-Seven</p>
  <h2>Ghosts and Portraits</h2>

  <p class="first">Hogwarts is home to an unusual concentration of ghosts, more than any other building in Britain and perhaps more than any building in the world. This is not coincidence. The castle's thousand years of continuous habitation, its role as a place of formative experience for generations of witches and wizards, and certain properties of the site itself all contribute to the accumulation of spectral residents.</p>

  <p>Ghosts are the imprints left by witches and wizards who fear death sufficiently to refuse the journey onward. They are not the persons they once were; the transformation involved in becoming a ghost strips away some capacity for growth and change, leaving only a persistent echo of the living individual. Ghosts can experience emotions, hold conversations, and form relationships, but they cannot truly develop. They are static, fixed forever at the moment of their deaths, while the living world changes around them.</p>

  <p>The ghost hierarchy at Hogwarts has developed over centuries. Four house ghosts hold positions of particular prominence, each associated with one of the four houses. Nearly Headless Nick, properly Sir Nicholas de Mimsy-Porpington, has served as Gryffindor's ghost since his execution in 1492. His partial decapitation, the result of a blunt axe and multiple strikes, gives him his nickname and excludes him, to his perpetual frustration, from the Headless Hunt. The Fat Friar, whose round figure and jovial manner belie a more complex history, represents Hufflepuff. The Grey Lady, whose identity as Rowena Ravenclaw's daughter Helena was long a closely guarded secret, haunts her mother's house. The Bloody Baron, whose murder of Helena and subsequent suicide are memorialised in the chains he wears, serves Slytherin despite his historical connection to the Ravenclaw tragedy.</p>

  <p>Beyond the house ghosts, numerous other spectral residents inhabit the castle. Professor Binns, the History of Magic teacher, died sometime in the nineteenth century and has apparently not noticed, continuing to teach classes from his chair by the staff-room fire. Moaning Myrtle, a student who died in the twentieth century under circumstances examined in Book IV, haunts a second-floor bathroom and has become something of an institution. Various other ghosts drift through corridors, generally harmless but occasionally disconcerting to living students who encounter them unexpectedly.</p>

  <p>Ghost rights and responsibilities at Hogwarts have been codified through centuries of custom. Ghosts are expected to respect living privacy, to refrain from passing through living bodies without permission, and to avoid deliberately frightening students. In exchange, they are granted residence rights, freedom of movement throughout the castle, and a degree of respect from the living community. The Headless Hunt's annual visit, despite Nearly Headless Nick's exclusion, is tolerated as a matter of spectral tradition.</p>

  <p>Peeves the poltergeist is often confused with the castle's ghosts but is, in fact, a different order of being entirely. Peeves is not the imprint of a deceased person; he appears to be a spirit of chaos that crystallised from the accumulated magical mischief of centuries of students. He cannot be destroyed, cannot be reasoned with, and causes mayhem limited only by his fear of the Bloody Baron and the occasional Headmaster capable of commanding his respect. Various attempts to banish Peeves have failed; the 1876 proposal to evict him was abandoned when he began haunting the governor who had proposed it. Peeves is, for better or worse, a permanent feature of Hogwarts.</p>

  <hr/>

  <p>Portraits at Hogwarts serve functions both decorative and practical. The magical paintings that cover the castle's walls contain figures capable of movement, speech, and limited personality. They are not conscious in the way that living beings are conscious, but they possess enough simulated awareness to hold conversations, guard entrances, and carry messages between locations.</p>

  <p>The portrait network functions as a communication system throughout the castle and beyond. Figures in portraits can move between paintings, visiting other portraits in other locations. A message given to a portrait in the Headmaster's office might be carried, figure by figure, to a portrait in the Ministry of Magic within minutes. This network has been used for official communications, unofficial gossip, and everything in between. Its security is imperfect; portraits have been known to share information they were meant to keep secret.</p>

  <p>Portrait memory and reliability vary considerably. A recently painted portrait of a living subject may accurately reflect that subject's current knowledge and personality. But over time, portrait memories degrade and drift, influenced by conversations with the living, by the other portraits they interact with, and by their own limitations as magical constructs. A portrait several centuries old may remember events that never occurred, or remember genuine events incorrectly. The headmaster portraits, painted from life and imbued with particular care, retain more accuracy than most, but even they are not perfectly reliable sources.</p>

  <p>The headmaster portraits in the Headmaster's office hold special status. They are bound to serve the current Headmaster, offering advice when asked and undertaking missions within the portrait network. Their counsel draws on centuries of collective experience, which can be valuable. It can also be contradictory, as different former heads offer incompatible recommendations reflecting their own differing philosophies. The current Headmaster must ultimately make their own decisions; the portraits can only advise.</p>

</body>
</html>