<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 4: Selection of the Site</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <p class="chapter-number">Chapter Four</p>
  <h2>Selection of the Site</h2>

  <p class="first">Why Scotland? The question may seem obvious to modern readers, who have grown up with Hogwarts as an established fact of the Scottish Highlands. But to the founders, who came from England, Wales, and possibly Ireland, the choice of so remote a location required justification. The site they selected was far from any major centre of magical population, difficult to reach by the transport methods of the era, and subject to a climate that even the most charitable observer would describe as challenging. Yet they chose it nonetheless, and the reasons for that choice illuminate both the founders' priorities and the magical properties of the site itself.</p>

  <p>Remoteness, which might seem a disadvantage, was in fact the primary recommendation. The founders wanted a location far from Muggle eyes, somewhere that the coming and going of young witches and wizards would not attract attention. The Scottish Highlands in the tenth century were sparsely populated, difficult of access, and largely ignored by the political authorities of either Scotland or England. A castle could rise there without drawing the notice that would have attended similar construction in more settled regions.</p>

  <p>The site also possessed existing magical properties that made it attractive for the founders' purposes. The Black Lake, already present when the founders arrived, was home to a community of merpeople whose residence there suggested powerful magical currents in the area. The forest to the west, ancient even then, harboured creatures that would only live in places of significant magical concentration. And the land itself showed evidence of prior magical use: standing stones, since removed, that dated to prehistoric times and were aligned with celestial events in ways that suggested sophisticated magical astronomy.</p>

  <p>Some historians have argued that the site was selected because of ley line convergence, the theory that magical power flows along invisible lines across the Earth's surface and that intersections of these lines create places of unusual potency. This theory, popular in certain circles, lacks convincing evidence. No reliable method of detecting ley lines has ever been demonstrated, and the supposed effects of their convergence are indistinguishable from the effects of any other concentrated magical activity. I mention the theory only because it persists in popular accounts, not because I endorse it.</p>

  <p>What can be said with more confidence is that the site had existing relationships with the magical creatures who would become the school's neighbours. The merpeople of the Black Lake had lived there for centuries and were willing to negotiate terms of coexistence with the human settlers. The centaur herd in the forest, while not friendly exactly, were at least willing to tolerate human presence at the forest's edge. Had the founders chosen a site without such established magical communities, they would have faced either the difficulty of relocating unwilling creatures or the danger of conflict with resentful neighbours.</p>

  <p>Negotiations with these communities appear to have been conducted primarily by Hufflepuff, whose diplomatic skills and genuine respect for non-human magical beings made her the obvious choice for such delicate work. The agreements reached, fragments of which survive in the school archives, granted the merpeople exclusive sovereignty over the lake's depths in exchange for permitting human use of the surface. The centaurs retained full control of the forest in exchange for allowing the school to take wood from its edges. These agreements, remarkably, remain in force today, a testament to Hufflepuff's skill as a negotiator and to the founders' wisdom in recognising that they would need to coexist with their magical neighbours rather than dominate them.</p>

  <p>The founders apparently considered other sites before settling on the Scottish location. A reference in one charter fragment mentions "the Cornwall proposal," which was rejected for reasons not specified. Another fragment mentions "the island in the western sea," generally interpreted as a reference to one of the Irish offshore islands, which was abandoned because of logistical difficulties. A third location, somewhere in the Pennines, was reportedly rejected after Ravenclaw's divination suggested it would become a site of "great Muggle industry" in future centuries, a prediction that the modern cities of Manchester and Sheffield have amply fulfilled.</p>

  <p>The selection process appears to have taken several years, during which the founders visited potential sites, consulted with local magical communities, and conducted various forms of magical assessment. This was not a decision made lightly. The founders understood that they were choosing a location not just for themselves but for generations of students yet unborn. The site needed to be defensible, sustainable, and capable of supporting a large residential population indefinitely. That they chose so well is evident from the school's survival for a millennium. Whatever their other disagreements, the founders agreed on this: the place they built Hogwarts was the right place.</p>

</body>
</html>