<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Preface</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <h1>Preface</h1>

  <p class="first">I write these words from my study in Godric's Hollow, where the morning light falls upon the same hills that Godric Gryffindor himself once walked. From my window, I can see the memorial that stands in the village square, marking the spot where, according to local tradition, Gryffindor was born some eleven centuries past. Whether this tradition holds any truth is, like so much in magical history, a matter of considerable scholarly debate. But the proximity has shaped my life's work in ways both tangible and ineffable. To live in the shadow of such history is to feel its weight upon one's quill with every stroke.</p>

  <p>This volume represents the culmination of nearly sixty years of research into the founding, development, and traditions of Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry. It is not the first history of that venerable institution, nor shall it be the last. But I have endeavoured to make it the most comprehensive, drawing upon sources that previous historians have either overlooked or lacked the patience to properly interrogate.</p>

  <p>My primary sources have been varied and, I confess, occasionally vexing. The surviving documents from the founder era are fragmentary at best, many having been lost to the various calamities that have befallen wizarding archives over the centuries. What remains of the Hogwarts Charter exists in three partial copies, none of which agree entirely with the others. The personal correspondence of the founders, once housed in the Ministry archives, was largely destroyed during the Goblin Rebellion of 1612, when rebel forces briefly occupied the Ministry building and, in an act of cultural vandalism that still pains this historian, set fire to the historical records wing. The goblins maintain that this was accidental, a claim I find dubious given the precision with which the flames targeted documents relating to wizard-goblin land disputes.</p>

  <p>What the rebellions did not destroy, the boggarts did. The great boggart infestation of 1732 claimed an entire wing of Ministry records before anyone realised what was happening. The creature had taken the form of a small, unassuming filing error, a cataloguing discrepancy so minor that archivists simply worked around it for nearly three years. By the time the boggart's true nature was discovered, it had fed upon the fear and frustration of countless researchers, grown to considerable power, and corrupted or consumed documents dating back to the Ministry's founding. I mention this not merely as historical curiosity but as explanation for certain gaps in the narrative that follows. Where records should exist and do not, the 1732 boggart is often the culprit.</p>

  <p>In the absence of documentary evidence, I have relied heavily upon portrait interviews. The headmaster portraits at Hogwarts represent an invaluable historical resource, preserving the memories and perspectives of school leaders across the centuries. However, the discerning historian must approach portrait testimony with considerable caution. A portrait is not a person. It is an imprint, a magical echo, and that echo degrades over time in ways both subtle and profound. The older the portrait, the more its memories have been coloured by centuries of conversations with the living. I have found that portraits older than three centuries often cannot reliably distinguish between their original memories and stories they have been told about themselves. They become, in essence, repositories of legend rather than witnesses to fact.</p>

  <p>The Hogwarts ghosts present a different but related challenge. Unlike portraits, ghosts retain the full consciousness of their living selves, but that consciousness is forever fixed at the moment of death. They remember what they experienced, but they experienced only their own lives. Sir Nicholas de Mimsy-Porpington can tell us much about Hogwarts in the late fifteenth century, but his knowledge of earlier periods is secondhand at best. The Grey Lady, whose connection to the founder Rowena Ravenclaw might seem to make her an invaluable source, has proven reluctant to discuss the matter in any detail. In seven separate interviews spanning four decades, she has deflected my questions with a consistency that speaks either to profound personal pain or deliberate concealment. Perhaps both.</p>

  <p>Where documentary sources fail and testimonial evidence conflicts, I have attempted to triangulate using physical evidence within the castle itself. Magical architecture preserves history in ways that Muggle buildings cannot. The stones of Hogwarts remember, after a fashion. Certain chambers resonate with the magical signatures of their creators. The wards bear layers of modification that can be read, with sufficient skill, like the rings of a tree. I am not myself a ward specialist, but I have consulted extensively with the Department of Magical Law Enforcement's Curse-Breaking division and with several Gringotts consultants who prefer to remain unnamed.</p>

  <p>I must address, directly and early, the work of my predecessors in this field. Adalbert Waffling's <em>Hogwarts Through the Ages</em> has been the standard reference for nearly two centuries, and it would be churlish to deny its considerable merits. Waffling was a tireless researcher and a gifted prose stylist. However, his methods were, to speak frankly, insufficiently rigorous. He accepted folklore too readily, quoted portraits without apparent awareness of their limitations, and demonstrated a troubling tendency to favour narrative elegance over evidentiary precision. Where a good story conflicted with documentary evidence, Waffling consistently chose the story. I have endeavoured not to repeat this error, even when it means disappointing readers who have grown attached to certain colourful legends.</p>

  <p>Professor Vindictus Viridian's monograph on the founding era, while admirably sceptical, errs too far in the opposite direction. In his determination to strip away legend, Viridian dismisses sources that, while imperfect, nonetheless contain kernels of valuable information. His conclusion that we can know "essentially nothing" about the founders strikes me as intellectual cowardice masquerading as rigour. We can know something. We must simply be honest about the limits of our knowledge.</p>

  <p>This, then, is my methodological approach: to present what evidence exists, to acknowledge where it conflicts, to offer my own interpretations while making clear that they are interpretations, and to resist the historian's perpetual temptation to pretend certainty where none exists. The reader will find many hedged statements in the pages that follow. This is not timidity but honesty. The past does not yield its secrets easily, and the magical past, where documents can be forged with a wave of a wand and memories extracted like teeth, yields them less easily still.</p>

  <p>A word on organisation. I have divided this history into four books. The first treats the founding era, from the state of magical Britain before Hogwarts through the deaths of the last founders. The second examines the castle itself, that magnificent and maddening structure that has confounded cartographers for a millennium. The third addresses governance and tradition, the institutions and customs that have shaped student life across the centuries. The fourth recounts notable events, those moments when Hogwarts intersected with the broader currents of magical history. An extensive appendix provides technical details, lists, and primary source reproductions for the specialist reader.</p>

  <p>I am aware that many students purchase this book not for its scholarly content but because it appears on the required reading list for History of Magic. To those young readers I say: do not be discouraged by the volume's length. You need not absorb every detail to pass your O.W.L.s. But I hope that some of you, perhaps those who feel the past calling to them as I did in my own student days, will find here a doorway to deeper study. The history of Hogwarts is not merely the history of a school. It is the history of magical Britain itself, refracted through a single institution. To understand Hogwarts is to understand ourselves.</p>

  <p>I dedicate this work to the students of Hogwarts, past, present, and future. May you walk those corridors with some sense of how many have walked before you, and what they built, and what they suffered, and what they achieved. The stones beneath your feet are storied stones. I hope this book helps you hear what they have to say.</p>

  <p style="text-align: right; margin-top: 2em;">Bathilda Bagshot<br/>
  Godric's Hollow<br/>
  September, 1947</p>

</body>
</html>