<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 3: Change</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <span class="chapter-number">Chapter Three</span>
  <h1>Change</h1>
  <p class="first"><em>Nothing stays the same</em></p>

  <hr/>

  <p class="first">You are different from who you were ten years ago. The cells in your body have been replaced, your beliefs have shifted, your relationships have evolved. The city you live in is different. The world is different. Everything that exists persists through change, which means nothing is quite the thing it was.</p>

  <p>This is so obvious it barely seems worth saying. Yet we constantly forget it. We treat people as fixed types, situations as permanent, our own identities as settled. We make plans assuming the world will hold still. Then change surprises us.</p>

  <p>The concept of change is foundational because it forces a shift from snapshots to movies. Static thinking asks: what is this? Dynamic thinking asks: what is this becoming?</p>

  <h2>States and Transitions</h2>

  <p class="first">Here's a simple way to think about change: states and transitions.</p>

  <p>A state is a snapshot—how things are at a moment. The water is liquid. The company is profitable. The relationship is stable. States are useful for description, for getting oriented.</p>

  <p>A transition is the movement from one state to another. The water freezes. The company starts losing money. The relationship enters conflict. Transitions are where the action is.</p>

  <p>Distinguishing states from transitions sounds elementary, but it clarifies a lot. Many arguments are about states ("the economy is good" versus "the economy is bad") when they should be about transitions ("is it getting better or worse?"). Many plans assume a state will persist when they should ask: what transitions are likely?</p>

  <p>States feel solid. Transitions feel unsettling. Our minds prefer states, which is exactly why we need to deliberately attend to transitions.</p>

  <h2>Change as Default</h2>

  <p class="first">One perspective shift: instead of thinking of change as what happens to stable things, think of stability as what happens when changes balance out.</p>

  <p>You feel like a stable self, but you're maintaining that stability through continuous change. Cells die and regenerate. Memories fade and reform. Beliefs update. The "you" that persists is a pattern, not a fixed object—a river, not a rock.</p>

  <p>A company that seems stable is actually constantly changing: employees come and go, markets shift, competitors move. The stability you see is dynamic equilibrium—the company is changing in ways that happen to keep it recognizable.</p>

  <p>Even a rock is changing, just slowly. Mountains erode. Continents drift. On a long enough timescale, nothing stays the same.</p>

  <p>This isn't just philosophical musing. It has practical implications. If stability is the exception and change is the default, then preservation takes effort. Relationships don't maintain themselves. Skills atrophy without practice. Organizations drift without steering. The question isn't whether things will change but how and how fast.</p>

  <h2>Rates of Change</h2>

  <p class="first">Not all change happens at the same speed, and the differences matter enormously.</p>

  <p>Some things change fast: moods, stock prices, news cycles. Others change slowly: personalities, company cultures, geological formations. Problems often arise when fast-changing things interact with slow-changing things.</p>

  <p>Technology changes faster than regulation, which is why laws often lag behind what's possible. Individual decisions change faster than their consequences accumulate, which is why debt and health problems sneak up on people. Markets change faster than factories can be built, which is why supply chains get caught off guard.</p>

  <p>Understanding rates of change helps you anticipate mismatches. If you're changing faster than your environment can absorb, expect friction. If your environment is changing faster than you're adapting, expect to be left behind. The art is matching your rate of change to the situation.</p>

  <p>Fast change isn't always good; slow change isn't always bad. Some things should change slowly—constitutions, scientific consensus, the rules of a game. Stability provides predictability, which allows planning and investment. Other things need to change fast—startups, responses to crises, correcting mistakes. Speed provides adaptability. Wisdom is knowing which mode fits.</p>

  <h2>What Changes and What Stays</h2>

  <p class="first">In any situation, some things are changing while others stay fixed. Getting clear on which is which unlocks a lot.</p>

  <p>When you're feeling stuck, ask: what in this situation can actually change? Often you're treating as fixed something that could move. You assume you can't switch careers, can't have a difficult conversation, can't move to another city. But these are choices, not constraints—they just haven't been examined as choices.</p>

  <p>When you're feeling overwhelmed, ask: what in this situation is actually stable? Often you're treating as uncertain something that's quite reliable. Your skills won't evaporate overnight. Your relationships have more resilience than you fear. The ground is more solid than the chaos makes it feel.</p>

  <p>Every domain has its variables and its constants. A game has rules (fixed) and strategies (variable). A job has requirements (fixed) and approaches (variable). A relationship has commitments (fixed, ideally) and day-to-day dynamics (variable). Getting clear on the distinction focuses your attention on where action is possible.</p>

  <h2>Seeing Trends</h2>

  <p class="first">A trend is change with a direction. Not random fluctuation but movement toward (or away from) something.</p>

  <p>Spotting trends early is valuable. If you see that remote work is trending upward before everyone else does, you can prepare. If you see that your industry is trending toward obsolescence, you can pivot. If you see that a relationship is trending toward estrangement, you can intervene—or accept.</p>

  <p>But trends are tricky. The past direction doesn't guarantee future direction. The famous warning "past performance doesn't guarantee future results" applies far beyond investing. Yesterday's trend could reverse tomorrow. The skill is distinguishing durable trends from temporary fluctuations, which requires understanding the forces driving the change.</p>

  <p>Watch out for the recency bias: assuming the current direction will continue indefinitely. What's rising will keep rising; what's falling will keep falling. Markets do this constantly, and so do we in our personal forecasts. Sometimes trends continue. Sometimes they hit limits. Sometimes they reverse. Humility about which is happening now is warranted.</p>

  <h2>You as a Process</h2>

  <p class="first">If change is fundamental, then you are not a fixed entity but an ongoing process.</p>

  <p>This might sound destabilizing, but it's actually freeing. If you're a process, then you're not stuck with who you've been. The person who made past mistakes doesn't have to be the person who makes future decisions. The person who lacked a skill can become the person who has it. Identity is not destiny.</p>

  <p>At the same time, you're not infinitely malleable. You have patterns, tendencies, accumulated experiences that shape what changes are easy and which are hard. The process has momentum. Changing direction is possible but not free.</p>

  <p>The practical stance is: I'm shaped by my past but not determined by it. Change is possible but requires effort. The question isn't "who am I?" (a state) but "who am I becoming?" (a transition).</p>

  <p>This is the seed of change. Things become different. Stability is achieved, not given. States matter less than transitions. And you yourself are a process in motion.</p>

  <p>We'll deepen this when we discuss time, which gives change its direction. We'll deepen it again when we discuss feedback, which shapes how change unfolds. For now: notice that you're watching a movie, not a photograph. The frame will be different soon.</p>
</body>
</html>