<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 6: Feedback</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <span class="chapter-number">Chapter Six</span>
  <h1>Feedback</h1>
  <p class="first"><em>Outputs become inputs</em></p>

  <hr/>

  <p class="first">You say something awkward at a party. You notice the awkwardness. Now you're self-conscious. You say something more awkward. Your self-consciousness increases. The awkwardness deepens.</p>

  <p>This is feedback: the output of a process becomes an input to that same process. What comes out circles back to affect what goes in. And when that happens, things get interesting.</p>

  <p>Feedback is among the most important concepts in this book. It explains habits, markets, ecosystems, arguments, anxieties, and a thousand other phenomena. We'll return to it several times, deepening each pass. For now, let's plant the seed: outputs become inputs, and that changes everything.</p>

  <h2>The Loop</h2>

  <p class="first">In a simple chain, A causes B, which causes C, which causes D. The causal arrow points one direction. But sometimes D affects A. The chain becomes a loop.</p>

  <p>When your thermostat senses the temperature, it turns the heater on or off, which changes the temperature, which the thermostat senses. Loop. When you speak to someone, they react, you perceive their reaction, it affects what you say next. Loop. When a company's stock price rises, it attracts more investors, which pushes the price higher, which attracts more investors. Loop.</p>

  <p>The loop is everywhere once you start looking. Most interesting phenomena involve some form of feedback.</p>

  <h2>Why Loops Matter</h2>

  <p class="first">Feedback loops create behaviors that straight chains don't.</p>

  <p>Without feedback, effects just propagate outward. With feedback, effects circle back, creating cycles, stability, or runaway change. The loop is why some situations escalate while others settle. It's why some habits stick while others fade. It's why some arguments spiral and others resolve.</p>

  <p>If you're trying to understand why something is happening, look for the loop. What output is feeding back into what input? Find the loop and you've often found the engine driving the phenomenon.</p>

  <h2>Feeling the Loop</h2>

  <p class="first">Let's make this concrete with some everyday examples.</p>

  <p><strong>Confidence:</strong> You act confidently. People respond positively. Their positive response increases your confidence. You act more confidently. This loop can propel someone from nervous beginner to assured performer—or, running the other direction, from a small failure to a crisis of self-doubt.</p>

  <p><strong>Trust:</strong> You trust someone. You share something vulnerable. They handle it well. Your trust increases. You share more. Trust builds through repeated loops. Break the loop once—a betrayal—and it may never recover.</p>

  <p><strong>Debt:</strong> You borrow money. The interest accumulates. You can't pay the interest, so you borrow more. The interest accumulates faster. The debt grows. This is the debt spiral—a feedback loop that has destroyed families and nations.</p>

  <p><strong>Learning:</strong> You practice a skill. You improve. Improvement feels good, so you practice more. You improve more. This is the virtuous loop of mastery—when it works. When improvement is too slow or invisible, the loop breaks, and practice stops.</p>

  <p>In each case, the output (response, trust, debt, skill) feeds back into the input (action, vulnerability, borrowing, practice). The loop amplifies or diminishes, accelerates or stabilizes.</p>

  <h2>Seeing Loops Everywhere</h2>

  <p class="first">Once you have the concept, loops become visible everywhere.</p>

  <p>The economy is full of loops. Consumer spending affects business revenue, which affects employment, which affects consumer spending. Asset prices affect wealth, which affects spending, which affects asset prices.</p>

  <p>Ecosystems are loop structures. Predator populations affect prey populations, which affect food supply for predators, which affects predator populations. Remove one species and the whole web of loops shifts.</p>

  <p>Social dynamics are loops. One person's mood affects another's, which affects the first's. Information spreads and creates beliefs, which affect actions, which generate new information.</p>

  <p>Your own mind runs on loops. A thought triggers a feeling, which triggers more thoughts, which intensify the feeling. Anxiety about sleep causes poor sleep, which increases anxiety about sleep.</p>

  <h2>The Key Insight</h2>

  <p class="first">The key insight about feedback is deceptively simple: if you can identify the loop, you can often intervene.</p>

  <p>A spiraling argument can be interrupted if someone steps back from the loop instead of responding to the last thing said. A habit can be built or broken by modifying what feeds back into the habit loop. A market bubble can potentially be recognized before it pops by noticing the self-reinforcing dynamics.</p>

  <p>We'll develop this much more in later chapters. We'll distinguish loops that amplify from loops that stabilize. We'll see how loops interact with delay, creating oscillation. We'll learn to find where loops can be interrupted.</p>

  <p>For now, the seed: outputs become inputs. Things loop back. This simple pattern—cause affecting itself through its effects—generates much of the complexity in the world.</p>

  <p>When something is growing or shrinking relentlessly, ask: what's feeding back? When something is stuck in a stable pattern, ask: what's keeping it there? When something is oscillating between extremes, ask: what's circling?</p>

  <p>The loop is the unit of dynamic behavior. It's how the world runs itself.</p>
</body>
</html>