<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 9: Feedback (Growth)</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <span class="chapter-number">Chapter Nine</span>
  <h1>Feedback</h1>
  <p class="first"><em>Amplifying and stabilizing</em></p>

  <p class="spiral-note">Spiral return: Feedback first appeared in Chapter 6. Now we deepen it.</p>

  <hr/>

  <p class="first">You've met feedback: outputs becoming inputs, effects circling back to affect their causes. Now let's look closer. Not all feedback loops behave the same way. Some amplify. Some stabilize. Understanding the difference explains a lot about why the world unfolds as it does.</p>

  <h2>Two Kinds of Loops</h2>

  <p class="first">Imagine you're trying to balance a broomstick on your palm. When it tilts left, you move your hand left to catch it. When it tilts right, you move right. Your response opposes the disturbance. This is <strong>negative feedback</strong>—the loop acts to reduce deviation, to bring the system back toward a set point.</p>

  <p>Now imagine a microphone placed near its speaker. A tiny sound enters the microphone, gets amplified, comes out the speaker, enters the microphone again, gets amplified further. The screech grows until something breaks or someone intervenes. This is <strong>positive feedback</strong>—the loop amplifies deviation, pushing the system further in whatever direction it's already going.</p>

  <p>The names are confusing. "Positive" doesn't mean good, and "negative" doesn't mean bad. They describe what the loop does to change: positive feedback reinforces change; negative feedback resists it.</p>

  <h2>Negative Feedback: The Stabilizer</h2>

  <p class="first">Most of the stable systems you encounter run on negative feedback.</p>

  <p>Your body temperature is regulated by negative feedback. When you're too hot, you sweat; evaporation cools you down. When you're too cold, you shiver; muscle activity warms you up. The system opposes deviation, keeping temperature near 98.6°F.</p>

  <p>A thermostat works the same way. Temperature drops below the set point, the heater turns on. Temperature rises above the set point, the heater turns off. The system maintains stability by responding against change.</p>

  <p>Markets often exhibit negative feedback. When a product becomes scarce, price rises. Higher prices reduce demand and encourage supply. The scarcity resolves. The system pushes back toward equilibrium.</p>

  <p>Even conversations have negative feedback. Someone says something slightly off, and the other person gently corrects or reframes. The conversation stays on track, small deviations smoothed out through ongoing adjustment.</p>

  <p>Negative feedback creates stability, homeostasis, equilibrium. If you see something that stays stable despite disturbances, look for the negative feedback loop that's maintaining it.</p>

  <h2>Positive Feedback: The Amplifier</h2>

  <p class="first">Positive feedback is rarer but more dramatic.</p>

  <p>A bank run: a few people withdraw their money out of fear. Others see this and fear increases. More people withdraw. The fear intensifies. Eventually, the bank collapses—not because it was insolvent but because the feedback loop made it so. The initial fear caused the thing it feared.</p>

  <p>A viral video: a few people share it. More people see it, so more people share it. Visibility increases sharing, and sharing increases visibility. The loop runs until the content saturates its audience.</p>

  <p>An arms race: one country builds weapons. The other feels threatened and builds more. The first country responds. Each escalation triggers further escalation until exhaustion, agreement, or disaster.</p>

  <p>Positive feedback creates exponential growth, runaway change, explosions, and collapses. If you see something accelerating or spiraling out of control, look for the positive feedback loop driving it.</p>

  <h2>Most Systems Have Both</h2>

  <p class="first">Real systems usually contain both kinds of loops.</p>

  <p>A population of rabbits has positive feedback (more rabbits → more reproduction → more rabbits) but also negative feedback (more rabbits → less food per rabbit → fewer survive → fewer rabbits). The dynamics depend on which loop dominates when.</p>

  <p>A startup has positive feedback (more users → more value → more users) but also negative feedback (more growth → more complexity → slower growth). Success requires keeping the positive loop strong while managing the negative one.</p>

  <p>Your mood has both. Positive feedback can create spirals—feeling bad leads to withdrawal, which increases isolation, which makes you feel worse. But negative feedback exists too—feeling too bad eventually triggers action, conversation, or rest that pulls you back toward baseline.</p>

  <p>Understanding a system often means mapping which loops are present and which dominate under what conditions.</p>

  <h2>Delays and Oscillation</h2>

  <p class="first">Here's where it gets interesting: feedback loops with delays can oscillate.</p>

  <p>Imagine a shower with slow-responding plumbing. You turn the hot tap because the water is cold. Nothing happens for ten seconds, so you turn it more. Suddenly the water is scalding. You turn the cold tap up. Nothing happens, so you turn it more. Suddenly it's freezing. You oscillate between extremes because your adjustments don't take effect until after you've made additional adjustments.</p>

  <p>This is the nature of negative feedback with delay. The system overshoots, then overcorrects, then overshoots again. The delay means information about the effect of your action arrives too late to prevent overreaction.</p>

  <p>Economic cycles often have this structure. A company sees demand rising and increases production. But production takes time to ramp up. By the time the new capacity is online, demand has fallen. The company cuts back. By the time the cuts take effect, demand has risen again. Boom and bust, driven by delayed feedback.</p>

  <p>If you see oscillation—swings between extremes—look for a feedback loop with a delay. The solution is often to act more cautiously, give adjustments time to work before adjusting further.</p>

  <h2>Constraint Returns</h2>

  <p class="first">Here's where constraint meets feedback. Every positive feedback loop eventually hits a limit.</p>

  <p>Population growth can't continue forever—resources run out. Viral spread can't continue forever—you run out of people who haven't seen it. The bubble can't inflate forever—eventually, someone realizes the assets are overpriced.</p>

  <p>The question is whether the loop slows gradually as it approaches the constraint (a soft landing) or hits the constraint suddenly (a crash). Many disasters are positive feedback loops that hit hard constraints after everyone assumed the growth would continue.</p>

  <p>When you see a positive feedback loop running, ask: what's the constraint? How hard is it? How close is the system to hitting it?</p>

  <h2>Working with Feedback</h2>

  <p class="first">Once you see feedback, you can work with it.</p>

  <p><strong>To stabilize:</strong> Strengthen negative feedback loops. Create systems where deviations trigger correcting responses. Budgets, check-ins, thermostats, review processes—all are formalized negative feedback.</p>

  <p><strong>To grow:</strong> Harness positive feedback loops. Find where success feeds more success and invest there. Network effects, compounding returns, skill begetting opportunity—these are positive loops to ride.</p>

  <p><strong>To stop a spiral:</strong> Interrupt the loop. Identify where output becomes input and break the connection. Stop checking the thing that makes you anxious. Impose a waiting period before escalating. Change the environment so the feedback can't complete its circuit.</p>

  <p><strong>To reduce oscillation:</strong> Shorten delays or dampen responses. Get faster information about results. Act more incrementally. Build in buffers that absorb overreactions.</p>

  <h2>The Deeper Seed</h2>

  <p class="first">Feedback is now sharper in your mind. Loops that amplify. Loops that stabilize. Delays that create oscillation. Constraints that eventually bind.</p>

  <p>We'll return to feedback once more, in Part III, where we'll examine feedback in reasoning—how beliefs reinforce themselves, how to break confirmation loops, how to think about systems that respond to your thinking about them.</p>

  <p>For now: when you see something that persists despite disturbances, look for the stabilizing loop. When you see something accelerating or collapsing, look for the amplifying loop. When you see something oscillating, look for the delay. The loop is the engine; understanding it gives you a hand on the throttle.</p>
</body>
</html>