<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 12: Equilibrium</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <span class="chapter-number">Chapter Twelve</span>
  <h1>Equilibrium</h1>
  <p class="first"><em>Resting points</em></p>

  <p class="spiral-note">Building on: Feedback (Chapter 9), Change (Chapter 3)</p>

  <hr/>

  <p class="first">A marble in a bowl will settle at the bottom. Push it, and it rolls back. The bottom is an equilibrium—a resting point where the forces acting on the system balance out.</p>

  <p>Equilibria are everywhere. Markets settle on prices where supply meets demand. Conversations settle on topics both parties find interesting. Habits settle into routines that satisfy competing needs. Ecosystems settle into configurations where species coexist.</p>

  <p>Understanding equilibrium helps you see why things stay the way they are—and what it takes to change them.</p>

  <h2>Stable vs. Unstable</h2>

  <p class="first">Not all equilibria are alike. Some are stable—disturb them and they return. Others are unstable—disturb them and they collapse.</p>

  <p>A ball at the bottom of a bowl is in stable equilibrium. Push it, and gravity and the bowl's shape push it back. A ball balanced on top of a hill is in unstable equilibrium. It's at rest, but the slightest touch sends it rolling away, never to return.</p>

  <p>Many things that look stable are actually unstable equilibria, just waiting for the right disturbance. A market that looks solid might be one bad rumor from collapse. A relationship that looks fine might be one conflict from rupture. A career that looks secure might be one disruption from obsolescence.</p>

  <p>The question to ask: if this is disturbed, will it return, or will it go somewhere else? The answer tells you how stable the equilibrium actually is.</p>

  <h2>Equilibrium and Feedback</h2>

  <p class="first">Stable equilibria are maintained by negative feedback loops.</p>

  <p>The marble in the bowl returns to the bottom because when it moves away, gravity creates a force that pushes it back. The body maintains temperature because when temperature changes, sweating or shivering creates a response that counteracts the change. A price stays stable because when it moves, buying or selling pressure pushes it back.</p>

  <p>If you see something stable, look for the negative feedback maintaining it. If you want to create stability, design negative feedback loops that correct deviations.</p>

  <p>Conversely, unstable equilibria lack effective negative feedback, or have positive feedback that amplifies deviations. The ball on the hill has positive feedback—the farther it rolls, the faster it accelerates. The bank run has positive feedback—the more people withdraw, the more others want to withdraw.</p>

  <h2>Multiple Equilibria</h2>

  <p class="first">Many systems have more than one equilibrium. Which one the system settles into depends on where it starts or what disturbances hit it.</p>

  <p>Imagine a bowl with two dips. A marble could settle into either one. If it's on the left side, it rolls to the left dip. If it's on the right, it goes right. Same system, different equilibria, depending on initial conditions.</p>

  <p>This happens in social systems all the time. A neighborhood can settle into either a "well-maintained" equilibrium (everyone keeps up their property because everyone else does) or a "deteriorating" equilibrium (no one bothers because no one else does). Same people, same buildings, different equilibria—each self-reinforcing.</p>

  <p>A person can settle into a "healthy" equilibrium (good sleep, exercise, energy, which enable more sleep and exercise) or an "unhealthy" equilibrium (poor sleep, no energy, no exercise, which cause worse sleep). Both are stable in their own way.</p>

  <p>When you see something stuck in a bad equilibrium, the challenge isn't just to disturb it—it's to disturb it enough to cross over to a different, better equilibrium.</p>

  <h2>The Basin of Attraction</h2>

  <p class="first">Each equilibrium has a "basin"—the set of starting conditions that lead to it.</p>

  <p>Think of the two-dip bowl. The ridge between the dips is the boundary between basins. If you're on the left side of the ridge, you'll end up in the left dip no matter where you start on that side. If you're on the right, you'll end up in the right dip.</p>

  <p>In life, if you're solidly within the basin of a good equilibrium, small disturbances don't matter—you'll return. If you're near the boundary, small disturbances might tip you into a different basin. And if you're far into a bad basin, you need a big push to escape.</p>

  <p>This explains why some changes are easy and others are hard. If you're trying to change but you're deep in the basin of your current equilibrium, the system keeps pulling you back. You need not just a push but a sustained push that moves you across the boundary into a new basin.</p>

  <h2>Punctuated Equilibrium</h2>

  <p class="first">Sometimes systems stay in equilibrium for a long time, then suddenly shift to a new one.</p>

  <p>This is "punctuated equilibrium"—long periods of stability punctuated by rapid change. It's observed in evolution, where species remain stable for millions of years and then rapidly transform. It's observed in politics, where institutions persist unchanged until a crisis reshapes everything. It's observed in personal lives, where someone stays the same for years and then changes in months.</p>

  <p>The equilibrium looks eternal until it isn't. The stability was always contingent on conditions that could change. When they do, the system moves to a new equilibrium, often rapidly.</p>

  <p>If you're waiting for something to change, don't assume current stability means permanent stability. The equilibrium might shift overnight. If you're trying to preserve something, don't assume past stability guarantees future stability. Protect the conditions that maintain the equilibrium, or be prepared for punctuation.</p>

  <h2>Shifting Equilibria</h2>

  <p class="first">If you want to change where a system settles, you have two options: push the system, or move the equilibrium.</p>

  <p>Pushing the system means applying force to move it from one equilibrium to another. This works, but it's often hard—you're fighting the feedback loops that maintain the current state. And if you stop pushing, the system might drift back.</p>

  <p>Moving the equilibrium means changing the conditions so that a new point becomes the stable resting place. Change the incentives, and behavior follows without constant pushing. Change the environment, and the new equilibrium becomes natural.</p>

  <p>A thermostat is an example. You don't push the temperature; you set the desired temperature, and the feedback loop does the rest. Designing systems means designing the equilibria you want, not pushing against the equilibria you have.</p>

  <h2>The Seed</h2>

  <p class="first">Equilibrium explains why things stay the same—and what it takes to change them.</p>

  <p>Stable equilibria persist because negative feedback corrects disturbances. Unstable equilibria are waiting to collapse. Multiple equilibria mean the same system can settle into very different states. Basins of attraction explain why some changes are easy and others are hard. Punctuated equilibrium reminds us that stability isn't permanent.</p>

  <p>When you see something stuck, ask: what equilibrium is it in? When you want to change something, ask: can I move the equilibrium, or do I have to push against it? When you want to preserve something, ask: what maintains this equilibrium, and how might it break?</p>

  <p>We'll return to equilibrium in Part V, when we discuss finding and shifting the stable states of systems. For now, notice the resting points. They're where the world tends to be.</p>
</body>
</html>