<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 15: Adaptation</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <span class="chapter-number">Chapter Fifteen</span>
  <h1>Adaptation</h1>
  <p class="first"><em>Systems respond</em></p>

  <p class="spiral-note">Building on: Selection (Chapter 14), Feedback (Chapter 9)</p>

  <hr/>

  <p class="first">You install a speed camera and drivers slow down—at that camera. Then they speed up after passing it. You've changed behavior, but not in the way you intended. The system adapted.</p>

  <p>Adaptation is what happens when a system responds to pressure by changing. It's selection in action, feedback in motion, change directed by the environment. And it's one of the reasons the world is so much more complicated than simple cause-and-effect would suggest.</p>

  <h2>Systems Fight Back</h2>

  <p class="first">When you try to change a system, the system often pushes back.</p>

  <p>You try to diet, and your body adapts: metabolism slows, hunger increases. You try to impose a new rule, and people find workarounds. You try to regulate an industry, and firms restructure to avoid the regulation. You try to fix a bug, and the fix creates new bugs.</p>

  <p>This doesn't mean change is impossible—it means change is interactive. The system isn't passive. It responds. And that response often undermines the original intent.</p>

  <p>Simple cause-and-effect thinking asks: "If I do X, what will happen?" Adaptive thinking asks: "If I do X, how will the system respond, and then what will happen?"</p>

  <h2>Goodhart's Law</h2>

  <p class="first">"When a measure becomes a target, it ceases to be a good measure."</p>

  <p>This is Goodhart's Law, one of the fundamental principles of adaptation. The moment you start optimizing for something, the system adapts in ways that game the metric while missing the point.</p>

  <p>Schools teach to the test—students' scores improve, but learning might not. Surgeons avoid high-risk patients—mortality statistics improve, but patients who needed surgery don't get it. Managers chase quarterly earnings—numbers look good, but long-term health suffers.</p>

  <p>The metric was supposed to capture the thing you cared about. But once it became a target, people optimized the metric itself, often at the expense of the underlying reality.</p>

  <p>This isn't necessarily cynical or deceptive. Often people genuinely try to hit the target, and the metric genuinely rises. But the map diverges from the territory. The number improves while the reality it was meant to track deteriorates.</p>

  <h2>Cobra Effects</h2>

  <p class="first">British colonial administrators in India wanted to reduce the cobra population, so they offered a bounty for dead cobras. It worked at first—people killed cobras and brought them in. Then people started breeding cobras for the bounty. When the government canceled the bounty, the breeders released their now-worthless snakes. The cobra population ended up higher than before.</p>

  <p>This is a "cobra effect"—an intervention that backfires because the system adapted in an unexpected way.</p>

  <p>Rent control is intended to make housing affordable. But landlords adapt: they convert apartments to condos, reduce maintenance, exit the market. The supply of affordable housing can shrink.</p>

  <p>Antibiotics kill bacteria. But bacteria adapt: resistant strains survive and multiply. Eventually you face bacteria the antibiotics can't touch.</p>

  <p>The world is full of cobra effects—interventions that made sense in a static analysis but failed because the system didn't stay still.</p>

  <h2>Adaptation and Selection</h2>

  <p class="first">Adaptation and selection are deeply related. Selection is the mechanism; adaptation is the result.</p>

  <p>When you change the environment, you change the selection pressure. Whatever fits the new environment will be selected. This produces adaptation—the system changes to fit the new conditions.</p>

  <p>Understanding this link helps predict adaptation. Ask: if I make this change, what will now be selected for? Whatever is rewarded will increase. Whatever is penalized will decrease or find workarounds. The system will evolve toward the new fitness landscape.</p>

  <h2>Anticipating Adaptation</h2>

  <p class="first">You can't always predict exactly how a system will adapt, but you can get better at anticipating it.</p>

  <p><strong>Assume the system will respond.</strong> Don't treat it as passive. Ask: who has an interest in adapting? What resources do they have to adapt? What adaptations are easiest?</p>

  <p><strong>Look for gaming.</strong> Any metric can be gamed. Any rule can be worked around. Design for the workarounds you can predict, and monitor for the ones you can't.</p>

  <p><strong>Consider second-order effects.</strong> The first-order effect is the direct response. The second-order effect is the adaptation. The third-order effect is what happens when you respond to the adaptation. Think at least two steps ahead.</p>

  <p><strong>Test and iterate.</strong> Since you can't fully predict adaptation, intervene in small steps, observe the response, adjust. This is how you learn how the system actually adapts, rather than guessing.</p>

  <h2>Designing for Adaptation</h2>

  <p class="first">Sometimes you want a system that adapts well. Then the question is: how do you create adaptive capacity?</p>

  <p><strong>Variety:</strong> Adaptation requires variation. A system with diverse components can respond in diverse ways. Monocultures are fragile; diversity is robust.</p>

  <p><strong>Feedback:</strong> Adaptation requires information about what's working. Fast, accurate feedback enables fast, accurate adaptation. Slow or distorted feedback produces slow or misguided adaptation.</p>

  <p><strong>Flexibility:</strong> Adaptation requires the ability to change. A rigid system can't adapt even if it has information and variety. Preserve slack, avoid lock-in, maintain the ability to shift.</p>

  <p><strong>Selection pressure:</strong> Adaptation requires consequences. If everything survives regardless of fit, there's no selection, and adaptation doesn't happen. The pressure has to be real.</p>

  <h2>The Seed</h2>

  <p class="first">Adaptation is what happens when systems respond to change. It's selection in motion, feedback over time.</p>

  <p>Expecting systems to stay still when you intervene is naive. They'll adapt—sometimes helpfully, often in ways that undermine your intent. Goodhart's Law and cobra effects are warnings: the system will fight back.</p>

  <p>We'll return to adaptation in Part V, where we'll discuss designing for systems that learn and change. For now: expect the response. Systems adapt. Plan accordingly.</p>
</body>
</html>