<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 17: Inference</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <span class="chapter-number">Chapter Seventeen</span>
  <h1>Inference</h1>
  <p class="first"><em>Evidence moves belief</em></p>

  <p class="spiral-note">Building on: Distinction (Chapter 1)</p>

  <hr/>

  <p class="first">You observe that the street is wet. You conclude that it probably rained. The observation (wet street) wasn't the same as the conclusion (rain), but it moved your belief toward that conclusion. This is inference: using evidence to update what you think.</p>

  <p>Inference is how beliefs change in response to reality. Done well, it pulls your mental model closer to the world. Done poorly, it leads you astray. Understanding inference—and its different modes—is foundational to thinking clearly.</p>

  <h2>Three Modes of Inference</h2>

  <p class="first">Not all inference works the same way. There are three classical modes, each with different logic and different reliability.</p>

  <p><strong>Deduction</strong> moves from general to specific with certainty. If all humans are mortal, and Socrates is human, then Socrates is mortal. The conclusion is guaranteed by the premises. If the premises are true, the conclusion must be true. Deduction is the gold standard of certainty—but it only preserves truth, it doesn't create new knowledge.</p>

  <p><strong>Induction</strong> moves from specific to general with probability. You've seen a thousand white swans and no black ones. You conclude that all swans are probably white. The conclusion goes beyond the evidence—it makes a claim about swans you haven't seen. Induction is how we learn about the world, but it's never certain. The next swan might be black.</p>

  <p><strong>Abduction</strong> moves from observation to best explanation. The street is wet. Rain would explain this. Therefore, it probably rained. Abduction is inference to the best explanation—it asks "what would account for this?" It's how we diagnose problems, solve mysteries, and make sense of surprising observations. But the "best" explanation isn't always the true one.</p>

  <p>Most everyday reasoning mixes these modes. You observe evidence, induce patterns, deduce implications, and abduct explanations. Knowing which mode you're using helps you understand how much confidence is warranted.</p>

  <h2>Validity vs. Soundness</h2>

  <p class="first">Here's a crucial distinction: an argument can be valid but not sound.</p>

  <p>A valid argument is one where the conclusion follows from the premises. If the premises were true, the conclusion would have to be true. But the premises might not be true.</p>

  <p>"All birds can fly. Penguins are birds. Therefore, penguins can fly." The logic is valid—the conclusion follows from the premises. But the argument isn't sound because the first premise is false.</p>

  <p>A sound argument is valid and has true premises. That's when the conclusion is actually established.</p>

  <p>Many arguments in daily life are valid-looking but not sound. The logic seems to work, but one of the premises is wrong—often an implicit premise you didn't notice. When someone's argument feels off but you can't pinpoint why, check the premises. Something unstated is probably false.</p>

  <h2>The Evidence Principle</h2>

  <p class="first">Here's a simple principle that's surprisingly often violated: your beliefs should move in response to evidence.</p>

  <p>When you learn something new that's relevant to a belief, that belief should update. If you thought it would rain and then you see a sunny forecast, your confidence should decrease. If you thought a project was on track and then you learn of a delay, your assessment should change.</p>

  <p>This sounds obvious, but people constantly resist it. They dismiss evidence that conflicts with their beliefs. They fail to update when they should. They treat beliefs as possessions to be defended rather than maps to be corrected.</p>

  <p>The discipline of inference is letting evidence move you—even when the conclusion is uncomfortable. Especially when the conclusion is uncomfortable. That's when your map is most likely to be wrong and most in need of correction.</p>

  <h2>Where Inference Goes Wrong</h2>

  <p class="first">Inference fails in predictable ways.</p>

  <p><strong>Ignoring base rates:</strong> You meet someone who matches your stereotype of a librarian—quiet, bookish, wears glasses. You conclude they're probably a librarian. But there are far more accountants (or teachers, or programmers) than librarians. The base rate matters. We'll explore this more in the next chapter.</p>

  <p><strong>Confirmation bias:</strong> You notice evidence that supports your belief and miss evidence that contradicts it. You think your team is good because you remember the wins; you forget the losses. The evidence that reaches your inference process is filtered.</p>

  <p><strong>Overfitting:</strong> You find a pattern in limited data and conclude it's real. You had three good days after wearing your lucky socks, so you conclude the socks help. The pattern is probably noise, not signal.</p>

  <p><strong>Jumping to conclusions:</strong> You make a strong inference from weak evidence. Someone doesn't reply to your message; you conclude they're upset with you. The evidence supports many explanations; you picked one and ran with it.</p>

  <p>These failures aren't moral failings—they're default settings of human cognition. Overcoming them requires deliberate effort.</p>

  <h2>Distinction Returns</h2>

  <p class="first">Here's where distinction does powerful work in reasoning.</p>

  <p>Good inference requires distinguishing between what you observed and what you concluded. The observation is data; the conclusion is interpretation. Confusing them leads to overconfidence and error.</p>

  <p>"He's angry at me" is a conclusion. What you observed is a facial expression, a tone, a silence. Those observations might support the anger interpretation, but they might support other interpretations too. Distinguishing observation from interpretation opens space for alternatives.</p>

  <p>Good inference also requires distinguishing your beliefs from reality. Your belief is a model of the world, not the world itself. When evidence conflicts with belief, the world isn't wrong—your model is. The distinction keeps you oriented toward truth rather than toward defending your current position.</p>

  <h2>The Skill</h2>

  <p class="first">Inference is a skill, and like any skill it improves with practice.</p>

  <p>Practice noticing when you're inferring. Slow down and ask: what's the evidence? What's the conclusion? What mode of inference am I using? What alternative conclusions does the evidence support?</p>

  <p>Practice holding conclusions lightly. Strong opinions, weakly held. Be willing to update. Treat beliefs as hypotheses rather than commitments.</p>

  <p>Practice seeking disconfirming evidence. Don't just ask "what supports my belief?" Ask "what would disprove it? Have I looked for that?"</p>

  <p>The prepared mind infers well—drawing conclusions that follow from evidence, updating when evidence changes, maintaining appropriate uncertainty.</p>

  <h2>The Seed</h2>

  <p class="first">Inference is how evidence changes belief. Deduction gives certainty but not new knowledge. Induction gives new knowledge but not certainty. Abduction gives explanation but not proof.</p>

  <p>The next chapters deepen this: probability (how much should evidence move you?), causation (what does evidence really tell you about causes?), counterfactuals (what can you infer about what didn't happen?). Together they build a toolkit for reasoning well in an uncertain world.</p>

  <p>For now: notice when you're inferring. Notice the evidence, the conclusion, and the gap between them. That gap is where thinking happens—and where it can go wrong.</p>
</body>
</html>