<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 19: Causation</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <span class="chapter-number">Chapter Nineteen</span>
  <h1>Causation</h1>
  <p class="first"><em>What makes what happen</em></p>

  <p class="spiral-note">Building on: Relation (Chapter 2), Feedback (Chapter 9)</p>

  <hr/>

  <p class="first">You flip the switch and the light comes on. You conclude that flipping the switch caused the light. This seems straightforward—but causation is trickier than it appears. Understanding it deeply protects you from some of the most common errors in reasoning.</p>

  <h2>Correlation vs. Causation</h2>

  <p class="first">The classic warning: correlation is not causation.</p>

  <p>Ice cream sales and drowning deaths are correlated—they rise and fall together. But ice cream doesn't cause drowning. A third factor (summer) causes both. This is "confounding"—a hidden variable that creates a correlation without direct causation.</p>

  <p>People take sleeping pills and get worse sleep. Does that mean sleeping pills cause bad sleep? Maybe. Or maybe people who already sleep badly are more likely to take sleeping pills. The causation might run the opposite direction, or both might be caused by something else (stress, for instance).</p>

  <p>Correlation tells you that two things move together. It doesn't tell you if one causes the other, if the other causes the one, if something else causes both, or if the correlation is coincidence. Inferring causation from correlation requires additional reasoning.</p>

  <h2>The Intervention Test</h2>

  <p class="first">Here's a powerful way to think about causation: would intervening on X change Y?</p>

  <p>If X causes Y, then deliberately changing X should change Y. If ice cream caused drowning, then banning ice cream should reduce drowning. (It wouldn't, because ice cream doesn't cause drowning.) If flipping the switch causes the light to go on, then flipping the switch should turn on the light. (It does.)</p>

  <p>This intervention test is why experiments work. In a randomized experiment, you intervene on some subjects (give them the treatment) and not others (control group). If the groups differ in outcome, it's likely the intervention caused the difference, because you controlled for confounders through randomization.</p>

  <p>When you can't run an experiment, you can still ask: if I could intervene on this, would it change that? The thought experiment clarifies causal claims.</p>

  <h2>Confounders</h2>

  <p class="first">A confounder is a variable that affects both the supposed cause and the supposed effect.</p>

  <p>Suppose you notice that people who drink wine live longer. Does wine cause longevity? Maybe. Or maybe people who drink wine are wealthier, and wealth causes both wine-drinking and longevity through better healthcare. Wealth is a potential confounder.</p>

  <p>Confounders are everywhere, and they're easy to miss. Any time you see a correlation and want to infer causation, ask: what else might be causing both variables?</p>

  <p>Controlling for confounders is the main work of causal inference. In experiments, you randomize so that confounders are equally distributed. In observational studies, you try to measure and adjust for confounders—but you can never be sure you've caught them all.</p>

  <h2>Feedback and Reverse Causation</h2>

  <p class="first">Sometimes X causes Y and Y causes X. We saw this in feedback loops. But it creates a problem for causal inference.</p>

  <p>Does success cause confidence, or does confidence cause success? Probably both. The causal arrow runs in both directions. Trying to isolate one direction is tricky.</p>

  <p>Does economic growth cause political stability, or does political stability cause economic growth? Again, likely both. The system is a loop, not a line.</p>

  <p>When you're trying to understand causation, ask: is this a one-way arrow or a loop? If it's a loop, which direction is stronger? The answer often depends on context and timing.</p>

  <h2>Causal Chains</h2>

  <p class="first">Causes are often indirect, working through chains of intermediaries.</p>

  <p>Smoking causes cancer. But it does so through a chain: smoking introduces carcinogens, which damage DNA, which causes mutations, which cause uncontrolled cell growth, which is cancer. The causal chain is long, and each link can vary.</p>

  <p>Understanding causal chains helps identify where to intervene. You could try to stop smoking (early in the chain) or try to repair DNA damage (later in the chain) or try to kill cancer cells (at the end). Different links offer different leverage points.</p>

  <p>It also helps understand why correlations might not be stable. If you disrupt one link in the chain, the correlation between the endpoints might vanish even though each individual link is still real.</p>

  <h2>Multiple Causes</h2>

  <p class="first">Most effects have multiple causes.</p>

  <p>A fire requires fuel, oxygen, and heat. Remove any one and there's no fire. Each is a necessary cause but not a sufficient cause. Together they're sufficient.</p>

  <p>A business failure might be caused by bad strategy, bad execution, bad luck, and bad timing—all contributing. No single factor is "the" cause; causation is distributed.</p>

  <p>When you're trying to understand why something happened, resist the urge to find "the" cause. Ask instead: what were the contributing causes? What combination was necessary? What would have been sufficient to prevent it?</p>

  <h2>Thinking Causally</h2>

  <p class="first">Causal thinking is a discipline. It means:</p>

  <p><strong>Not jumping from correlation to causation.</strong> When you see a relationship, ask: is this causal? What confounders might explain it? What evidence would distinguish correlation from causation?</p>

  <p><strong>Thinking about mechanisms.</strong> How would the cause produce the effect? What's the chain? If you can't articulate a mechanism, your causal claim is weaker.</p>

  <p><strong>Considering interventions.</strong> If I changed the supposed cause, would the effect change? This thought experiment tests whether the causation is real.</p>

  <p><strong>Accounting for complexity.</strong> Most effects have multiple causes, feedback loops, and confounders. Simple "X causes Y" statements often hide complicated reality.</p>

  <h2>The Seed</h2>

  <p class="first">Causation answers the question: what makes what happen? But the answer is rarely simple. Correlation hints at causation but doesn't prove it. Confounders create fake associations. Feedback muddies direction. Chains distribute causation. Multiple causes share responsibility.</p>

  <p>The next chapter deepens causation into counterfactuals: not just what caused this, but what would have happened otherwise. That question turns out to be essential for understanding causes—and for learning from the past.</p>

  <p>For now: when you see two things associated, pause before concluding that one causes the other. Ask the skeptical questions. Causation is real, but inferring it correctly takes work.</p>
</body>
</html>