<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 20: Counterfactual</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <span class="chapter-number">Chapter Twenty</span>
  <h1>Counterfactual</h1>
  <p class="first"><em>The worlds that didn't happen</em></p>

  <p class="spiral-note">Building on: Time (Chapter 5), Causation (Chapter 19)</p>

  <hr/>

  <p class="first">You missed your flight. If you had left ten minutes earlier, you would have made it. But you didn't leave earlier—that world didn't happen. You're reasoning about it anyway.</p>

  <p>This is counterfactual thinking: reasoning about what would have happened if things had been different. It's how we understand causes, learn from mistakes, and evaluate decisions. It's also tricky, because the counterfactual world is imaginary, yet our conclusions about it have real consequences.</p>

  <h2>Counterfactuals and Causation</h2>

  <p class="first">Counterfactuals are deeply connected to causation. One influential theory says that "X caused Y" means "if X had not happened, Y would not have happened."</p>

  <p>The match caused the fire. Translation: if the match hadn't been struck, the fire wouldn't have started. The alarm clock woke you up. Translation: if the alarm hadn't rung, you would have kept sleeping.</p>

  <p>This counterfactual definition of causation is intuitive but also reveals complexities. What if you had a backup alarm? Then the first alarm didn't really cause you to wake up—you would have woken anyway. What if someone else would have lit the fire with a lighter? Then the match didn't uniquely cause it—the fire would have happened regardless.</p>

  <p>Counterfactuals make us specify: what exactly would have been different, and what would have followed from that difference?</p>

  <h2>Constructing Counterfactuals</h2>

  <p class="first">When you reason counterfactually, you're imagining an alternative world. But which alternative world?</p>

  <p>"If I had studied harder" doesn't specify a single counterfactual—there are infinite ways to study harder. "If the plane had crashed" doesn't specify where, when, or how. The counterfactual is underdetermined, and different fillings-in lead to different conclusions.</p>

  <p>The standard approach is to consider the "nearest possible world"—the alternative that's most similar to reality except for the change you're considering. If you're evaluating whether leaving earlier would have helped, you imagine the world where you left earlier and everything else stayed as similar as possible.</p>

  <p>But "nearest possible world" isn't always clear. The art of counterfactual reasoning is choosing the right comparison—the alternative that illuminates what you're trying to understand.</p>

  <h2>Learning from Counterfactuals</h2>

  <p class="first">Counterfactual thinking is essential for learning from experience.</p>

  <p>If you made a decision and it turned out badly, you need to ask: would a different decision have turned out better? If yes, you've learned something. If the outcome would have been bad regardless, maybe the decision wasn't really the problem.</p>

  <p>This is harder than it sounds. You can't actually run the alternative world—you can only imagine it. Your imagination might be biased. You might think "if only I had..." while ignoring that the alternative had its own risks.</p>

  <p>Still, the discipline is valuable. After a failure, ask: what would have happened if I'd done something different? Be specific about the alternative. Consider multiple alternatives. Try to imagine them honestly, including their downsides.</p>

  <p>After a success, ask the same question. Would things have gone well regardless? Was your action essential, or would you have succeeded anyway? This protects against learning superstitions from coincidences.</p>

  <h2>Counterfactuals and Blame</h2>

  <p class="first">We assign blame and credit using counterfactuals.</p>

  <p>"It's your fault we're late" means "if you had acted differently, we'd be on time." "She saved my life" means "without her intervention, I'd be dead." Responsibility is inherently counterfactual—it depends on what would have happened otherwise.</p>

  <p>But this creates puzzles. If the outcome was overdetermined—if many factors contributed and any of them would have been sufficient—who's responsible? If you would have failed anyway, is the person who contributed to your failure really blameworthy?</p>

  <p>These questions don't always have clean answers. But asking them explicitly—what would have happened otherwise?—clarifies what we're arguing about when we assign responsibility.</p>

  <h2>The Seduction of Counterfactuals</h2>

  <p class="first">Counterfactual thinking has a dark side: it can become rumination.</p>

  <p>"If only I had..." spiraling into regret about an unchangeable past. The counterfactual world is imaginary, but the suffering it causes is real. Obsessing over roads not taken doesn't help you navigate current roads.</p>

  <p>The discipline is to use counterfactuals instrumentally: for learning, for understanding causation, for making better future decisions. Not for torturing yourself about the past.</p>

  <p>Ask: is this counterfactual helping me learn something actionable, or is it just causing pain? If it's the latter, gently release it. The counterfactual served its purpose or never had one.</p>

  <h2>Counterfactual Imagination</h2>

  <p class="first">The ability to imagine counterfactuals might be one of humanity's distinctive capabilities.</p>

  <p>It underlies planning: "if I do X, then Y will happen." It underlies morality: "how would I feel if someone did this to me?" It underlies science: "if this theory is true, we should observe Z." It underlies fiction: "what if there were dragons?"</p>

  <p>Counterfactual imagination is the ability to mentally simulate worlds that don't exist. It's powerful and dangerous. Powerful because it lets us reason beyond immediate experience. Dangerous because it can trap us in fictional worlds while the real one waits.</p>

  <p>The prepared mind uses counterfactuals deliberately. To understand causation. To learn from experience. To evaluate decisions. To imagine possibilities. But always with awareness that the counterfactual is a tool, not reality—a map of a territory that never existed.</p>

  <h2>The Seed</h2>

  <p class="first">Counterfactual thinking asks: what would have happened otherwise? It's how we understand causes, learn from outcomes, and assign responsibility.</p>

  <p>The skill is choosing the right counterfactual—the comparison that illuminates the question at hand. And knowing when to let counterfactuals go—when the imaginary worlds have served their purpose and it's time to return to the one that exists.</p>

  <p>We'll return to counterfactuals in Part IV, when we discuss decision-making—evaluating choices by imagining their consequences. For now: practice asking "what if?" It's one of the most powerful questions available to a thinking mind.</p>
</body>
</html>