<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 22: Representation</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <span class="chapter-number">Chapter Twenty-Two</span>
  <h1>Representation</h1>
  <p class="first"><em>Maps and territories</em></p>

  <p class="spiral-note">Building on: Emergence (Chapter 11)</p>

  <hr/>

  <p class="first">"The map is not the territory." This phrase, from the philosopher Alfred Korzybski, captures something essential: our representations of the world are not the world itself. The distinction matters more than it might seem.</p>

  <h2>All Models Are Wrong</h2>

  <p class="first">The statistician George Box said, "All models are wrong, but some are useful."</p>

  <p>A model is a simplified representation of reality. It captures some features and ignores others. A map shows roads but not smells. An economic model includes some variables but not others. A mental model of your friend captures patterns but misses their full complexity.</p>

  <p>Because models simplify, they're always wrong in some respect—they always leave something out. But that's not a failure; it's the point. A map that included every detail would be the size of the territory. It would be useless. The value of a model is in what it leaves out.</p>

  <p>The question isn't whether a model is wrong—it always is. The question is whether it's useful for the purpose at hand.</p>

  <h2>Representations Shape Thought</h2>

  <p class="first">Here's the deeper point: the representation you use shapes how you think.</p>

  <p>Consider different ways to represent a math problem. In Roman numerals, multiplication is nightmarish. In Arabic numerals, it's tractable. Same problem, different representation, vastly different difficulty. The representation makes some things easy and others hard.</p>

  <p>Consider different ways to visualize data. A pie chart emphasizes parts of a whole. A line chart emphasizes change over time. A scatter plot emphasizes correlation. Same data, different representation, different insights jump out.</p>

  <p>Consider different ways to frame a decision. "90% survival rate" feels different than "10% mortality rate." Same information, different representation, different emotional response.</p>

  <p>You don't think about the world directly. You think about your representation of the world. And the representation shapes what you can see, what you can compute, what conclusions feel natural.</p>

  <h2>Confusing Map with Territory</h2>

  <p class="first">One of the most common errors is confusing the representation with the thing represented.</p>

  <p>You mistake your mental model of someone for the actual person. They do something that contradicts the model, and instead of updating the model, you get confused or resentful. "That's not like you!" Maybe the model was wrong.</p>

  <p>You mistake the metric for the thing it measures. Test scores are a representation of learning; they're not learning itself. GDP is a representation of economic activity; it's not prosperity itself. When you optimize the representation, you can damage the underlying reality.</p>

  <p>You mistake the category for the individual. "He's an introvert" is a representation—a category. But the actual person is more complex than any label. Using the representation as if it were complete misses the territory's richness.</p>

  <p>The discipline is to remember: this is a map. It's useful. But there's more to reality than what the map shows.</p>

  <h2>Multiple Representations</h2>

  <p class="first">For any territory, many maps are possible.</p>

  <p>A city can be mapped by roads, by elevation, by demographics, by history, by smell. Each map is valid; each captures something different; each is incomplete.</p>

  <p>A person can be understood through psychology, biology, sociology, economics, narrative. Each lens reveals something; each conceals something else.</p>

  <p>A problem can be framed in multiple ways, and the framing changes what solutions become visible. Stuck? Try a different representation. What's invisible in one map might be obvious in another.</p>

  <p>The prepared mind doesn't commit to a single map. It has multiple representations available and can switch between them as needed.</p>

  <h2>When Models Break</h2>

  <p class="first">Models work until they don't. The moment reality departs from the model's assumptions, the model becomes not just incomplete but misleading.</p>

  <p>Financial models assume past patterns continue. Then a crisis hits and the patterns break. The models didn't just fail to predict; they actively misled, creating confidence that wasn't warranted.</p>

  <p>Your mental model of a relationship assumes stability. Then something changes—a secret is revealed, a context shifts. Suddenly your map doesn't match the territory at all.</p>

  <p>The danger isn't that models are wrong—that's always true. The danger is forgetting that they're wrong and trusting them past their limits.</p>

  <p>When a model's predictions fail, that's information. Not just about what happened, but about the model's limits. Update the model, or recognize that this is a territory it can't map.</p>

  <h2>Emergence and Representation</h2>

  <p class="first">Here's where emergence connects: different levels of emergence require different representations.</p>

  <p>You can represent a traffic flow in terms of individual cars or in terms of aggregate patterns. The individual-car representation captures details but misses the flow. The aggregate representation captures the flow but loses the cars. Both are valid; they're maps at different levels.</p>

  <p>When you're trying to understand an emergent phenomenon, the right representation is usually at the level of emergence, not below it. A map of neurons won't help you navigate a conversation. A map of transactions won't help you understand a market trend. You need a map at the right level.</p>

  <h2>The Seed</h2>

  <p class="first">Representations are how we engage with the world—through models, maps, categories, and frames. They're always incomplete, always wrong in some respect. But they're also essential; we can't think without them.</p>

  <p>The skill is to use representations without being used by them. Remember that the map isn't the territory. Be ready to switch maps when one isn't working. Don't confuse the model with reality. And when the model fails, update it—that's what models are for.</p>

  <p>We'll return to representation in Part VI, when we discuss abstraction—choosing what level of detail to work at. For now: notice your maps. They're tools, not truths. Use them accordingly.</p>
</body>
</html>