<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 23: Feedback (Power)</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <span class="chapter-number">Chapter Twenty-Three</span>
  <h1>Feedback</h1>
  <p class="first"><em>Reasoning about loops</em></p>

  <p class="spiral-note">Spiral return: Feedback deepened in Chapter 9. Now we see its full power.</p>

  <hr/>

  <p class="first">You've encountered feedback twice now: outputs becoming inputs (Chapter 6), then amplifying versus stabilizing loops (Chapter 9). Now we reach the power level: using feedback as a reasoning tool.</p>

  <h2>Feedback in Belief</h2>

  <p class="first">Your beliefs themselves form feedback loops.</p>

  <p>Confirmation bias is a feedback loop: you believe something, so you notice evidence that supports it, which strengthens the belief, which makes you notice more supporting evidence. The belief amplifies itself.</p>

  <p>Self-fulfilling prophecies are feedback loops: you believe someone doesn't like you, so you act coldly toward them, which makes them respond coldly, which confirms your belief. Your belief created the reality that justified it.</p>

  <p>Expectation effects are feedback loops: you expect to fail, so you don't try hard, so you fail, which confirms you were right to expect failure. Or you expect to succeed, so you act confidently, so others respond positively, so you succeed.</p>

  <p>Many beliefs aren't just descriptions of reality—they're forces that shape reality. Recognizing this is the first step to working with it.</p>

  <h2>Breaking Confirmation Loops</h2>

  <p class="first">If your beliefs can amplify themselves, how do you escape false beliefs?</p>

  <p><strong>Deliberately seek disconfirming evidence.</strong> Don't just ask "what supports this?" Ask "what would disprove it? Have I looked for that?" This is hard because the loop resists—you're less likely to notice and remember disconfirming evidence. But with effort, you can search for it.</p>

  <p><strong>Entertain alternatives seriously.</strong> Don't just defend your belief; actually try on other beliefs. What would you see if the opposite were true? What evidence would look the same either way?</p>

  <p><strong>Get outside perspectives.</strong> Others have different confirmation loops. They might see disconfirming evidence you've filtered out. Seek disagreement, not agreement.</p>

  <p><strong>Bet on your beliefs.</strong> If you had to wager money, how confident would you really be? Betting forces you to confront evidence you might otherwise dismiss.</p>

  <p>Breaking confirmation loops is uncomfortable. You're fighting your own cognitive machinery. But it's essential if you care about believing true things rather than just comfortable things.</p>

  <h2>Reflexivity</h2>

  <p class="first">Sometimes the system you're reasoning about responds to your reasoning about it. This is reflexivity.</p>

  <p>Markets are reflexive: if enough people believe a stock will rise, they buy it, and it rises. The belief affects the reality. This means prediction isn't just observation—it's intervention. Your prediction can make itself true or false.</p>

  <p>Social interactions are reflexive: your judgment of someone affects how you treat them, which affects how they behave toward you. Your assessment isn't neutral; it shapes what it assesses.</p>

  <p>Even self-knowledge is reflexive: the act of observing yourself can change yourself. Once you notice a habit, you behave differently around it.</p>

  <p>Reflexivity makes reasoning tricky. You're not studying a static object; you're part of a loop. Your thoughts about the system are inside the system.</p>

  <h2>Using Reflexivity</h2>

  <p class="first">Reflexivity isn't just a problem—it's a tool.</p>

  <p>If beliefs can be self-fulfilling, choose beliefs that help you. Believing you can improve makes you try, which helps you improve. Believing a relationship can work makes you invest, which helps it work. The belief isn't just a prediction; it's an intervention.</p>

  <p>This isn't the same as positive thinking delusion. You can't believe your way to impossible outcomes. But at the margins, where outcomes depend on effort and attitude, the loop can be harnessed.</p>

  <p>The discipline is: believe useful things where the belief can become self-fulfilling, while remaining accurate about things where the belief doesn't affect the outcome. Don't deceive yourself about facts; do choose attitudes that help.</p>

  <h2>Feedback in Arguments</h2>

  <p class="first">Arguments often involve feedback loops that make them escalate.</p>

  <p>You say something the other person takes as an attack. They respond defensively, which you take as confirmation that they're unreasonable. You escalate; they escalate. The loop amplifies conflict.</p>

  <p>To interrupt: recognize the loop. Notice when your response is driven by theirs, which was driven by yours. Ask: am I adding energy to a feedback loop that's going somewhere I don't want?</p>

  <p>You can break the loop by not responding in kind. A de-escalating response doesn't feed the loop. An acknowledgment of their point instead of a counterattack interrupts the cycle.</p>

  <p>This is hard in the moment. The loop is designed to carry you along. But seeing it as a loop, rather than just reacting, gives you the chance to step out.</p>

  <h2>Feedback and Systems Thinking</h2>

  <p class="first">Here's the full power of feedback as a reasoning tool: see any complex situation and look for the loops.</p>

  <p>Why is this institution stuck? Find the feedback loops maintaining its equilibrium. Why is this problem getting worse? Find the amplifying loops driving the escalation. Why does this pattern persist despite everyone's efforts? Find the feedback that regenerates it.</p>

  <p>Then ask: where can I interrupt, strengthen, or redirect a loop?</p>

  <p>This is systems thinking—seeing the structure of loops rather than just the elements. It's the key to understanding why systems behave as they do, and it's often the key to changing them.</p>

  <h2>The Power</h2>

  <p class="first">You now have feedback at full power.</p>

  <p>At the seed level, you learned: outputs become inputs. At the growth level, you learned: some loops amplify, others stabilize. Now you see: feedback shapes belief, makes reasoning reflexive, drives arguments, and underlies the behavior of complex systems.</p>

  <p>When you're confused about why something is happening, look for the loop. When you're stuck in a pattern, look for the loop. When you're trying to change something and it resists, look for the loop.</p>

  <p>The loop is everywhere. Seeing it is the tool.</p>
</body>
</html>