<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 29: Reversibility</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <span class="chapter-number">Chapter Twenty-Nine</span>
  <h1>Reversibility</h1>
  <p class="first"><em>One-way and two-way doors</em></p>

  <p class="spiral-note">Building on: Time (Chapter 5), Threshold (Chapter 13)</p>

  <hr/>

  <p class="first">Some choices can be undone. Others can't. This distinction—reversibility—should fundamentally shape how you decide.</p>

  <h2>Two Types of Decisions</h2>

  <p class="first">Amazon famously distinguishes between "one-way doors" and "two-way doors."</p>

  <p>A two-way door decision can be reversed. You try something, and if it doesn't work, you can go back. Hire someone and it doesn't work out? You can let them go. Launch a feature and users hate it? You can remove it. Change a process and it fails? You can change it back.</p>

  <p>A one-way door decision is irreversible. Once you go through, you can't come back. Sell the company and it's sold. Have a child and you're a parent. Say something you can't unsay. Break something you can't unbreak.</p>

  <p>The type of door should determine the process. Two-way doors merit speed—try it, learn, adjust. One-way doors merit caution—gather information, deliberate, get input.</p>

  <h2>The Reversibility Spectrum</h2>

  <p class="first">Most decisions aren't purely reversible or irreversible—they're somewhere on a spectrum.</p>

  <p>Moving to a new city is technically reversible—you can move back. But it's costly: uprooted relationships, lost time, financial expense. It's a "mostly one-way" door.</p>

  <p>Changing your pricing strategy is mostly reversible—you can change it back. But customers might lose trust, and the market might have shifted. It's a "mostly two-way" door with some friction.</p>

  <p>The question isn't just "can I reverse this?" but "how hard is it to reverse, and what is lost in the reversal?"</p>

  <p>Some things are reversible in theory but practically irreversible due to cost, time, or damage. Treat those as one-way doors.</p>

  <h2>Calibrating Caution</h2>

  <p class="first">Reversibility should calibrate your caution.</p>

  <p><strong>For two-way doors:</strong> Move fast. Information is gained by doing, not deliberating. The cost of being wrong is low—you can correct course. The cost of being slow might be higher—you miss opportunities, you lose momentum.</p>

  <p><strong>For one-way doors:</strong> Move carefully. The cost of being wrong is high—you can't correct course. The cost of being slow is lower—better to be right than fast. Gather more information, consult more people, think more deeply.</p>

  <p>A common error: treating two-way doors like one-way doors. Deliberating endlessly on easily-reversed decisions. Analysis paralysis on things you could just try.</p>

  <p>Another common error: treating one-way doors like two-way doors. Rushing into irreversible commitments. Assuming you can course-correct when you can't.</p>

  <h2>Time and Reversibility</h2>

  <p class="first">Time makes many reversible things irreversible.</p>

  <p>You could have learned that language, but you didn't, and now you're older and the opportunity feels foreclosed. You could have taken that job, but you didn't, and now the door has closed. Time is the great one-way door—it doesn't open again.</p>

  <p>This means: consider not just whether a decision is reversible, but how reversibility changes over time. Some decisions are reversible now but won't be later. Some options expire.</p>

  <p>The awareness of time's irreversibility should create urgency around options that are closing. Not panic, but recognition: if I don't decide, the decision will be made for me.</p>

  <h2>The Value of Experiments</h2>

  <p class="first">Reversibility enables experimentation.</p>

  <p>If you can try something and reverse it if it fails, you can learn empirically rather than guessing theoretically. The reversible experiment generates information that no amount of analysis could provide.</p>

  <p>This is why reversibility is so valuable. It converts uncertainty into learning. Instead of betting on your prediction, you test it. Instead of analyzing forever, you find out.</p>

  <p>When facing a decision, ask: can I turn this into an experiment? Can I try at small scale first? Can I structure it so failure is survivable and reversible?</p>

  <p>If yes, experiment. The information is worth more than the analysis.</p>

  <h2>Threshold Returns</h2>

  <p class="first">Some reversals require crossing thresholds again—and that might be hard or impossible.</p>

  <p>You can leave a relationship, but rebuilding the trust might require crossing a threshold that's now much higher. You can apologize, but undoing the damage might require more than a threshold's worth of effort.</p>

  <p>Reversibility isn't just about whether you can go back—it's about whether you can go back to where you started. Often you can reverse the decision but not the consequences.</p>

  <h2>The Seed</h2>

  <p class="first">Reversibility determines how much caution is warranted. Two-way doors merit speed; one-way doors merit care. Most decisions are somewhere on the spectrum. Time moves many things from reversible toward irreversible.</p>

  <p>The prepared mind classifies decisions by reversibility before deciding how to decide. It moves fast through two-way doors, gathering information through action. It pauses at one-way doors, gathering information before committing.</p>

  <p>The next chapter inverts this: commitment. Sometimes deliberately burning your options—making things irreversible—is the strategic move.</p>
</body>
</html>