<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 30: Commitment</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <span class="chapter-number">Chapter Thirty</span>
  <h1>Commitment</h1>
  <p class="first"><em>When burning boats helps</em></p>

  <p class="spiral-note">Building on: Optionality (Chapter 27), Equilibrium (Chapter 12)</p>

  <hr/>

  <p class="first">We've just said options are valuable and reversibility is good. Now for the twist: sometimes destroying your options is exactly right. This is commitment—deliberately limiting yourself in ways that serve you.</p>

  <h2>The Paradox of Self-Binding</h2>

  <p class="first">Odysseus wanted to hear the Sirens' song—famously irresistible music that lured sailors to their deaths. He knew that when he heard it, he'd want to steer toward the Sirens. So he had himself tied to the mast and ordered his crew to plug their ears and ignore his commands.</p>

  <p>By binding himself, Odysseus achieved something impossible for his future self: he heard the song without dying. The constraint made possible what freedom would have destroyed.</p>

  <p>This is the paradox: sometimes reducing your options increases your outcomes. The commitment device—the rope, the contract, the public declaration—constrains you in ways that serve you.</p>

  <h2>Credibility</h2>

  <p class="first">Commitment creates credibility.</p>

  <p>If you can easily change your mind, your promises don't mean much. If you can't easily change your mind—if you've locked yourself in—your promises become believable.</p>

  <p>A contract is a commitment device. It says: I've made it costly for me to break this promise, so you can trust that I'll keep it. Without the contract, you might promise and then defect when it's convenient. With the contract, defection is expensive.</p>

  <p>A reputation is a commitment device. It says: if I break my word, I lose something valuable—my reputation. That stake makes my word credible.</p>

  <p>Even burning your boats—famously done by Cortés when landing in Mexico—is a credibility move. It tells your troops: we're not retreating. It tells the enemy: we're not negotiating. The absence of exit makes the commitment to fight undeniable.</p>

  <h2>Self-Control</h2>

  <p class="first">Commitment also works as self-control.</p>

  <p>You want to save money, but your future self might spend it. So you set up automatic transfers to savings—a commitment device that removes the decision from your future self.</p>

  <p>You want to exercise, but your future self might skip it. So you sign up for classes with a cancellation fee—a commitment device that makes skipping costly.</p>

  <p>You want to finish a project, but your future self might procrastinate. So you announce a public deadline—a commitment device that makes delay embarrassing.</p>

  <p>These devices work by changing the incentives facing your future self. Instead of relying on willpower (which is unreliable), you change the structure so that the desired behavior becomes the path of least resistance.</p>

  <h2>Schelling Points</h2>

  <p class="first">Commitment is related to coordination. How do people coordinate when they can't communicate?</p>

  <p>Thomas Schelling's answer: they commit to focal points—obvious choices that both parties can independently recognize. If you're meeting someone in New York with no arranged place or time, you might both guess "noon at Grand Central." It's a Schelling point—an obvious choice that coordination happens around.</p>

  <p>Commitment to a Schelling point makes coordination possible. If everyone is expected to show up at noon at Grand Central, departing from that expectation is risky—you might miss the meeting. The Schelling point becomes self-reinforcing.</p>

  <p>This is why norms work. A norm is a Schelling point for behavior. Everyone expects everyone else to follow it, so everyone does, so the expectation is confirmed. The commitment is collective.</p>

  <h2>When to Commit</h2>

  <p class="first">Commitment isn't always good. Burning options has obvious costs: you can't take the options you burned.</p>

  <p>Commit when:</p>

  <p><strong>You need credibility.</strong> If others need to trust your intentions, removing your ability to defect makes your commitment credible.</p>

  <p><strong>You need self-control.</strong> If your future self can't be trusted to do the right thing, commitment devices remove the temptation.</p>

  <p><strong>You need to coordinate.</strong> If you need to act together with others, commitment to a focal point enables coordination.</p>

  <p><strong>You need to focus.</strong> If spreading across many options is diluting your effort, commitment concentrates your resources.</p>

  <p>Don't commit when:</p>

  <p><strong>Uncertainty is high.</strong> If you might need to change course, preserving options is wiser than burning them.</p>

  <p><strong>Commitment is premature.</strong> If you haven't yet learned which path is right, committing now just locks in ignorance.</p>

  <p><strong>The commitment isn't credible anyway.</strong> If everyone knows you can escape the commitment, it doesn't buy you credibility.</p>

  <h2>Equilibrium Returns</h2>

  <p class="first">Commitment shifts equilibria.</p>

  <p>Consider a negotiation. Without commitment, both sides posture, the equilibrium is unstable, and outcomes depend on moment-to-moment bargaining. With commitment—"this is my final offer"—you shift the equilibrium. If the commitment is credible, the other side has to take it or leave it.</p>

  <p>Consider self-improvement. Without commitment, you oscillate—starting and stopping, trying and quitting. The equilibrium is the status quo. With commitment—signing up, putting money down, telling people—you shift the equilibrium. The cost of stopping is now higher than the cost of continuing.</p>

  <p>Commitment works by changing the payoff structure, which changes where equilibria exist.</p>

  <h2>The Seed</h2>

  <p class="first">Commitment is the strategic destruction of options. It sounds like the opposite of everything good—flexibility, optionality, reversibility. But sometimes burning boats is the point.</p>

  <p>Commitment creates credibility, enables self-control, facilitates coordination, and shifts equilibria. It turns your constraints into features.</p>

  <p>The prepared mind knows when to preserve options and when to destroy them. Both are tools. Both serve agency.</p>
</body>
</html>