<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 31: Defaults</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <span class="chapter-number">Chapter Thirty-One</span>
  <h1>Defaults</h1>
  <p class="first"><em>What happens if you do nothing</em></p>

  <p class="spiral-note">Building on: Equilibrium (Chapter 12), Feedback (Chapter 23)</p>

  <hr/>

  <p class="first">Every situation has a default—what happens if you take no action. The default is where inertia takes you, the path of least resistance, the outcome that occurs by not choosing.</p>

  <p>Defaults are among the most powerful forces shaping behavior. Understand them, and you understand much of why things are the way they are.</p>

  <h2>The Power of Defaults</h2>

  <p class="first">When countries changed from opt-in to opt-out organ donation, donation rates jumped from around 20% to over 90%. The people didn't change. The information didn't change. The choice didn't change—they could still opt out. Only the default changed.</p>

  <p>When companies auto-enrolled employees in retirement savings, participation rates went from under 50% to over 90%. Again, nothing changed except the default.</p>

  <p>Defaults are powerful because changing from the default requires effort—awareness, decision, action. Most people most of the time just... don't. They accept the default not because they prefer it but because departing from it is work.</p>

  <h2>Why Defaults Stick</h2>

  <p class="first">Several forces make defaults sticky.</p>

  <p><strong>Inertia:</strong> Changing requires energy. Not changing doesn't. Inertia favors the default.</p>

  <p><strong>Attention:</strong> Noticing that a default exists and could be changed requires attention. Most defaults are invisible—they're what happens when you're not looking.</p>

  <p><strong>Endorsement effect:</strong> We often interpret the default as a recommendation. "This must be the normal or suggested option." We treat the default as someone else's considered choice, even when it's arbitrary.</p>

  <p><strong>Loss aversion:</strong> Changing from the default means giving something up. We feel losses more than gains, so the default has an advantage.</p>

  <p>Together, these forces mean that defaults shape outcomes far more than their "just one option among many" status would suggest.</p>

  <h2>Seeing Defaults</h2>

  <p class="first">The first step is seeing the defaults operating in your life.</p>

  <p><strong>Daily defaults:</strong> What do you eat if you don't think about it? Where do you spend time if you don't plan? What apps do you open when you're bored?</p>

  <p><strong>Work defaults:</strong> What meetings are on your calendar automatically? What communication channels do you use by default? What tasks get attention when you're not prioritizing?</p>

  <p><strong>Life defaults:</strong> Where do you live? Who do you spend time with? What do you believe? How much of this is active choice versus inherited default?</p>

  <p>Many defaults feel like choices because you could change them. But if you haven't actively chosen, the default chose for you.</p>

  <h2>Designing Defaults</h2>

  <p class="first">If defaults are powerful, then designing them is powerful too.</p>

  <p><strong>For yourself:</strong> Set your own defaults. Make the desired behavior the path of least resistance. Want to eat healthily? Make healthy food the default (visible, accessible). Want to exercise? Make it the default (scheduled, automatic). Want to save? Make saving the default (automatic transfers).</p>

  <p><strong>For others:</strong> If you're designing systems, the defaults you set will shape behavior. Default privacy settings shape privacy. Default investment options shape portfolios. Default meeting lengths shape time use.</p>

  <p>The ethics of default-design matter. Manipulating defaults to exploit people is wrong. But designing defaults that help people achieve what they actually want is good design.</p>

  <h2>Resisting Bad Defaults</h2>

  <p class="first">Some defaults serve you badly. The default to check your phone when bored. The default to say yes when asked. The default to stay in a job, relationship, or city that no longer fits.</p>

  <p>Resisting bad defaults requires:</p>

  <p><strong>Awareness:</strong> Notice the default. Name it. "The default here is X."</p>

  <p><strong>Evaluation:</strong> Ask whether you'd actively choose this. "If I were choosing fresh, would I choose X?"</p>

  <p><strong>Effort:</strong> If the default is wrong, spend the energy to change it. This is costly, which is why defaults persist. But the cost is usually worth it for defaults that are genuinely harmful.</p>

  <p>The prepared mind audits its defaults. Not constantly—that would be exhausting—but periodically. What's running on autopilot? Does it still serve me?</p>

  <h2>Equilibrium Returns</h2>

  <p class="first">Defaults are closely related to equilibria. A default is an equilibrium that exists because changing is costly.</p>

  <p>But defaults can be shifted, creating new equilibria. If you change the default meeting length from 60 minutes to 25 minutes, the new default becomes the new equilibrium. Meetings get shorter.</p>

  <p>Shifting defaults is often easier than fighting behavior directly. Instead of asking everyone to make shorter meetings, just change the calendar default. The system nudges toward the new equilibrium.</p>

  <h2>The Seed</h2>

  <p class="first">Defaults are what happen when you do nothing. They're powerful because changing from them requires effort most people won't spend.</p>

  <p>See your defaults. Question whether they serve you. Design better ones. Resist the bad ones. And when designing for others, remember: the default you set may be the outcome you get.</p>
</body>
</html>