<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 33: Counterfactual (Growth)</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <span class="chapter-number">Chapter Thirty-Three</span>
  <h1>Counterfactual</h1>
  <p class="first"><em>Learning from unchosen paths</em></p>

  <p class="spiral-note">Spiral return: Counterfactual first appeared in Chapter 20. Now we apply it to decisions.</p>

  <hr/>

  <p class="first">We've seen counterfactual thinking as a reasoning tool—understanding causation by asking what would have happened otherwise. Now let's apply it to decision-making: using counterfactuals to learn from choices, both yours and others'.</p>

  <h2>Evaluating Decisions</h2>

  <p class="first">A decision led to an outcome. Was it a good decision?</p>

  <p>The naive answer: good outcome means good decision. Bad outcome means bad decision. But this conflates luck and skill.</p>

  <p>The counterfactual question is better: compared to what? What would have happened if you'd decided differently? If the alternative would have been worse, the decision was good—even if the outcome was bad. If the alternative would have been better, the decision was bad—even if the outcome was good.</p>

  <p>This is hard because you can't directly observe the counterfactual. But you can reason about it. Given what you knew at the time, given the probabilities, given the alternatives—was this the right call?</p>

  <h2>Learning from Your Own Decisions</h2>

  <p class="first">To learn from experience, you need counterfactual analysis.</p>

  <p>It's not enough to note outcomes. You need to ask: what decision led to this? What alternatives did I have? What would those alternatives have produced?</p>

  <p>Sometimes you'll find the decision was right but you got unlucky. That's not a mistake to correct. Sometimes you'll find the decision was wrong but you got lucky. That is something to correct—next time you might not be lucky.</p>

  <p>Keep a decision journal. Record decisions when you make them, including your reasoning and the alternatives considered. Later, review: given what happened, was the decision sound? What would you do differently? This practice makes counterfactual analysis habitual.</p>

  <h2>Learning from Others' Decisions</h2>

  <p class="first">Others' decisions are also learning opportunities—if you analyze them counterfactually.</p>

  <p>When someone succeeds, don't just conclude they made good decisions. Ask: what was the counterfactual? What risks did they take that could have gone badly? Did they have good judgment or just good luck?</p>

  <p>When someone fails, don't just conclude they made bad decisions. Ask: what was the counterfactual? Could a reasonable person have made the same choice? Was this bad judgment or bad luck?</p>

  <p>Survivorship bias makes this hard. We see the survivors and study their methods, forgetting the non-survivors who used the same methods and failed. Counterfactual thinking corrects: what happened to those who chose differently?</p>

  <h2>Pre-Mortems</h2>

  <p class="first">A powerful technique: the pre-mortem. Before making a decision, imagine it has already failed. Then ask: why did it fail?</p>

  <p>This is counterfactual thinking applied forward. You're imagining the counterfactual world where your decision went wrong and reasoning about what could cause that.</p>

  <p>Pre-mortems surface risks that optimism hides. When you're excited about a plan, you don't naturally imagine its failure. The pre-mortem forces you to. "We're one year later and this project collapsed. Why?" The answers reveal vulnerabilities you can address now.</p>

  <h2>The Road Not Taken</h2>

  <p class="first">Counterfactual thinking has an emotional dimension: regret.</p>

  <p>Regret is the feeling when a counterfactual seems better than reality. "If only I had..." You imagine the alternative and feel pain at not having it.</p>

  <p>Regret can be useful if it drives learning. But it can also be corrosive if it becomes rumination—endless cycling through counterfactuals that can't be changed.</p>

  <p>The discipline: use counterfactuals instrumentally. Extract the lesson, then release the counterfactual. The imaginary world served its purpose; don't live there.</p>

  <h2>Causation Returns</h2>

  <p class="first">Counterfactual analysis deepens causal understanding.</p>

  <p>When you ask "what would have happened otherwise," you're isolating the causal contribution of a factor. If the outcome would have been the same regardless, the factor wasn't causal. If the outcome would have been different, it was.</p>

  <p>This applies to decision-making: did my decision cause the outcome, or would the outcome have happened anyway? If my decision was essential, I deserve credit or blame. If the outcome was overdetermined, my decision mattered less.</p>

  <h2>The Deeper Seed</h2>

  <p class="first">Counterfactual thinking is now a tool for agency. You use it to evaluate decisions by comparing to alternatives. You use it to learn from outcomes by asking what would have happened differently. You use it prospectively in pre-mortems to surface risks.</p>

  <p>The worlds that didn't happen teach us about the world that did—and about how to shape the worlds to come.</p>
</body>
</html>