<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 34: Incentives</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <span class="chapter-number">Chapter Thirty-Four</span>
  <h1>Incentives</h1>
  <p class="first"><em>Why people do what they do</em></p>

  <p class="spiral-note">Building on: Feedback (Chapter 23), Adaptation (Chapter 15)</p>

  <hr/>

  <p class="first">"Show me the incentives and I'll show you the outcome." This quote, attributed to Charlie Munger, captures something essential: if you want to understand behavior, follow the incentives. People respond to what they're rewarded for.</p>

  <h2>The Logic of Incentives</h2>

  <p class="first">An incentive is anything that motivates action—reward or punishment, carrot or stick.</p>

  <p>Humans (and other agents) tend to do more of what's rewarded and less of what's punished. This sounds obvious, yet we constantly forget it when trying to explain or change behavior.</p>

  <p>When behavior puzzles you, ask: what are the incentives? What's rewarded? What's punished? Often the puzzle dissolves. The behavior isn't irrational—it's rational given the incentive structure. It just happens that the incentive structure doesn't align with what you (or society, or even the person themselves) actually want.</p>

  <h2>Misaligned Incentives</h2>

  <p class="first">Many of the world's problems come from misaligned incentives.</p>

  <p>Salespeople are paid by commission, so they push products customers don't need. The incentive (sell more) misaligns with the goal (serve customers well).</p>

  <p>Politicians need votes, so they favor visible, short-term wins over invisible, long-term investments. The incentive (get re-elected) misaligns with the goal (good governance).</p>

  <p>Executives are evaluated quarterly, so they sacrifice long-term value for short-term metrics. The incentive (hit this quarter's numbers) misaligns with the goal (build a durable company).</p>

  <p>In each case, the people aren't evil—they're responding to incentives. Change the incentives, and the behavior often follows.</p>

  <h2>Incentives and Intent</h2>

  <p class="first">Here's a crucial insight: incentives explain behavior better than intentions.</p>

  <p>People might intend to do the right thing. But if incentives push them toward the wrong thing, intentions often lose. "I want to help customers" loses to "my bonus depends on sales."</p>

  <p>When diagnosing problems, don't ask: what are people trying to do? Ask: what are people incentivized to do? The gap between these explains much dysfunction.</p>

  <p>When designing solutions, don't just appeal to intentions. Align the incentives. Make the desired behavior also the rewarded behavior.</p>

  <h2>Adaptation Returns</h2>

  <p class="first">Remember adaptation: systems respond to pressure. Incentives are a form of pressure.</p>

  <p>When you create an incentive, people adapt to it. They find ways to achieve what's measured, whether or not it was what you meant. This is why Goodhart's Law operates: the measure becomes the target, and people optimize the measure while missing the underlying goal.</p>

  <p>Anticipate adaptation when designing incentives. Ask: how might people game this? What unintended behaviors might emerge? If people optimize for exactly what you're measuring, will that actually get you what you want?</p>

  <h2>Self-Incentives</h2>

  <p class="first">You can design your own incentives.</p>

  <p>Want to exercise more? Create incentives—rewards for going, costs for skipping. Want to finish a project? Bet money on the deadline; the loss aversion creates incentive.</p>

  <p>This is the commitment device idea applied to motivation. You're changing your own incentive landscape to make desired behaviors more attractive.</p>

  <p>It feels strange to incentivize yourself, as if motivation should be pure. But if you accept that incentives shape behavior—including your own—then designing your incentives is just good self-management.</p>

  <h2>Seeing Incentives</h2>

  <p class="first">Train yourself to see incentives everywhere.</p>

  <p>When someone behaves badly, ask: what are they incentivized to do? Often you'll find they're responding rationally to a badly designed system.</p>

  <p>When a system produces bad outcomes, ask: what incentives does it create? Often you'll find the incentives are optimized for something other than the stated goal.</p>

  <p>When you want to change something, ask: how would changing the incentives change behavior? Often that's more effective than persuasion, rules, or punishment.</p>

  <h2>The Seed</h2>

  <p class="first">Incentives explain behavior. People do what they're rewarded for. Misaligned incentives produce dysfunction. Intentions matter less than incentives when they conflict.</p>

  <p>The prepared mind sees the incentive structure beneath the surface behavior. It asks "what's rewarded?" before asking "what's wrong?" It designs systems that align incentives with goals. And it designs its own incentives to shape its own behavior.</p>

  <p>We'll deepen this in Part V, when we discuss systems that learn and adapt. For now: follow the incentives. They explain more than you might think.</p>
</body>
</html>