<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 35: Probability (Growth)</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <span class="chapter-number">Chapter Thirty-Five</span>
  <h1>Probability</h1>
  <p class="first"><em>Deciding under uncertainty</em></p>

  <p class="spiral-note">Spiral return: Probability first appeared in Chapter 18. Now we apply it to decisions.</p>

  <hr/>

  <p class="first">You've met probability as a reasoning tool—degrees of belief, base rates, updating. Now let's apply it to decisions. How do you choose wisely when outcomes are uncertain?</p>

  <h2>Decisions as Bets</h2>

  <p class="first">Every decision is a bet. You're wagering something (time, money, opportunity) on an uncertain outcome.</p>

  <p>The job you take is a bet that it will work out. The relationship you commit to is a bet that it will last. The project you start is a bet that it will succeed.</p>

  <p>Viewing decisions as bets changes your mindset. You're not trying to be right with certainty—that's often impossible. You're trying to make good bets given uncertainty. Good bets can have bad outcomes; bad bets can have good outcomes. The quality of the bet is about process, not just result.</p>

  <h2>Expected Value Revisited</h2>

  <p class="first">Expected value combines probability and payoff: probability times payoff, summed across outcomes.</p>

  <p>A bet with 80% chance of winning $100 and 20% chance of winning nothing has expected value of $80. A bet with 10% chance of winning $1000 and 90% chance of winning nothing has expected value of $100. The second has higher expected value despite lower probability of success.</p>

  <p>For many decisions, expected value is the right guide. Take the action with highest expected value. Over many such decisions, you'll come out ahead.</p>

  <p>But expected value isn't everything...</p>

  <h2>When Expected Value Isn't Enough</h2>

  <p class="first">Expected value assumes you can survive the bad outcomes long enough to average out.</p>

  <p>Consider a bet: 50% chance to triple your money, 50% chance to lose everything. The expected value is positive. But if you bet everything and lose, you're wiped out—there's no next round to average into.</p>

  <p>This is ruin risk. Some negative outcomes you can't recover from. For such decisions, expected value isn't the right guide. You need to consider not just average outcomes but worst-case outcomes and your ability to survive them.</p>

  <p>Never bet so much that losing ruins you, no matter how good the expected value.</p>

  <h2>Uncertainty About Uncertainty</h2>

  <p class="first">Often you don't know the probabilities. You're uncertain about your uncertainty.</p>

  <p>You think there's a 60% chance the project succeeds, but honestly, it could be anywhere from 30% to 80%. You're working with estimated probabilities, not precise ones.</p>

  <p>When uncertainty about probabilities is high, this favors options that are robust across a range of scenarios. Don't optimize for your best guess—hedge for the possibility that your best guess is wrong.</p>

  <p>This is why diversification works. You don't know which investments will succeed, so you spread across many. This sacrifices maximum upside but protects against being wrong about which one would have worked.</p>

  <h2>Optionality Meets Probability</h2>

  <p class="first">Options are particularly valuable under uncertainty.</p>

  <p>If you're uncertain what's right, preserving options until you know more is often wise. The option to choose later, with more information, has value precisely because your probabilities are imprecise now.</p>

  <p>Conversely, if probabilities are clear and one option dominates, waiting just costs you. Don't preserve options when the right choice is already clear.</p>

  <h2>Tradeoffs Under Uncertainty</h2>

  <p class="first">Tradeoffs become more complex when outcomes are uncertain.</p>

  <p>You might trade high expected value for low variance (play it safe). Or trade low expected value for optionality (pay for the right to decide later). Or trade some probability of ruin for much higher expected value (take calculated risks).</p>

  <p>These aren't tradeoffs between goods—they're tradeoffs between different probability distributions. The right choice depends on your risk tolerance, your situation, and whether you can afford the worst case.</p>

  <h2>Decision Hygiene</h2>

  <p class="first">Here are practices for deciding well under uncertainty:</p>

  <p><strong>Estimate probabilities explicitly.</strong> Even rough estimates clarify thinking. "Probably" is vague; "70%" is workable.</p>

  <p><strong>Consider multiple scenarios.</strong> Best case, worst case, most likely case. How does the decision look in each?</p>

  <p><strong>Ask what would change your mind.</strong> What evidence would update your probabilities? Knowing this in advance prevents motivated reasoning later.</p>

  <p><strong>Separate the decision from the outcome.</strong> A good decision can have a bad outcome. Judge your process, not just your results.</p>

  <p><strong>Review decisions periodically.</strong> Were your probabilities calibrated? Did you make good bets that happened to lose, or bad bets that happened to win?</p>

  <h2>The Deeper Seed</h2>

  <p class="first">Probability now applies to agency. Decisions are bets. Expected value guides, but survival matters too. Uncertainty about uncertainty favors robustness. Options are especially valuable when you don't know the odds.</p>

  <p>The prepared mind doesn't pretend to certainty it lacks. It estimates probabilities, considers scenarios, makes good bets, and learns from outcomes. It accepts that good decisions can fail and bad decisions can succeed—and judges itself by process, not just results.</p>
</body>
</html>