<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 36: The Prepared Decider</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <span class="chapter-number">Chapter Thirty-Six</span>
  <h1>The Prepared Decider</h1>
  <p class="first"><em>Interlude</em></p>

  <hr/>

  <p class="first">We've now covered the agency orbit: optionality, trade-offs, reversibility, commitment, defaults, attention. Plus spiral returns on counterfactual, incentives, and probability. Let's synthesize.</p>

  <h2>The Decision Framework</h2>

  <p class="first">Here's how the concepts fit together for making decisions:</p>

  <p><strong>1. Understand the constraints.</strong> What are you choosing between? What's the trade-off? What's the opportunity cost? Don't evaluate options in isolation—compare them.</p>

  <p><strong>2. Assess reversibility.</strong> Is this a one-way door or a two-way door? Can you correct course if wrong? Reversibility determines how much caution is warranted.</p>

  <p><strong>3. Consider optionality.</strong> Does this choice create options or foreclose them? Is preserving flexibility valuable here, or does commitment help?</p>

  <p><strong>4. Examine incentives.</strong> What are you (and others) incentivized to do? Are the incentives aligned with actual goals? If not, how can you realign them?</p>

  <p><strong>5. Check defaults.</strong> What happens if you don't decide? Is the default acceptable? Should you decide actively or let the default play out?</p>

  <p><strong>6. Estimate probabilities.</strong> What outcomes are possible? How likely is each? Don't fake certainty—work with degrees of confidence.</p>

  <p><strong>7. Consider scenarios.</strong> Best case, worst case, most likely. Can you survive the worst case? Is the expected value worth the risk?</p>

  <p><strong>8. Learn from the counterfactual.</strong> After deciding, what would have happened if you'd chosen differently? Use this to calibrate future decisions.</p>

  <hr/>

  <h2>Common Decision Errors</h2>

  <p class="first">Armed with these concepts, you can spot common mistakes:</p>

  <p><strong>Analysis paralysis on two-way doors.</strong> Over-deliberating easily reversible decisions. Just try it. Learn and adjust.</p>

  <p><strong>Recklessness with one-way doors.</strong> Under-deliberating irreversible decisions. Slow down. Gather more information. Consult others.</p>

  <p><strong>Ignoring opportunity cost.</strong> Evaluating options in isolation rather than against alternatives. Ask: compared to what?</p>

  <p><strong>Letting defaults win.</strong> Accepting the default without examining whether you'd actively choose it. Audit your defaults.</p>

  <p><strong>Conflating decision quality with outcome quality.</strong> Judging decisions by results rather than process. Good decisions can fail; bad decisions can succeed.</p>

  <p><strong>Ignoring incentives.</strong> Expecting people (including yourself) to act against their incentives. They usually won't. Align incentives instead.</p>

  <p><strong>Preserving options forever.</strong> Never converting optionality into commitment. At some point, you have to choose.</p>

  <p><strong>Committing prematurely.</strong> Burning options before learning which path is right. Wait until clarity emerges.</p>

  <hr/>

  <h2>The Agency Stance</h2>

  <p class="first">All of this amounts to an agency stance—a way of relating to choices.</p>

  <p>The stance is: I am choosing. Choices have trade-offs; I accept that. I can't have everything; I'll pick what matters most. Some choices are reversible, and I'll move fast on those. Some aren't, and I'll be careful. I design my defaults, incentives, and environment to make good choices easier. I direct my attention deliberately. I make decisions under uncertainty, using probability as my guide. And I learn from outcomes, distinguishing decision quality from luck.</p>

  <p>This stance is neither impulsive nor paralyzed. It's thoughtfully decisive. It moves through the world making considered bets, aware of constraints, mindful of trade-offs, calibrated to risk.</p>

  <hr/>

  <h2>What Comes Next</h2>

  <p class="first">So far: foundations for thinking, patterns that recur, reasoning that sees clearly, agency that chooses well. But all of this happens in context—within systems that have their own dynamics.</p>

  <p>Part V turns to systems: how parts compose into wholes that behave. Stocks and flows, incentives at scale, leverage points, adaptation dynamics, scale effects. This is where the rubber meets the road—where your choices interact with complex systems that push back.</p>

  <p>The prepared mind understands itself. The prepared mind in context understands the systems it's embedded in. Let's go there.</p>
</body>
</html>