<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 37: Stocks and Flows</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <span class="chapter-number">Chapter Thirty-Seven</span>
  <h1>Stocks and Flows</h1>
  <p class="first"><em>Bathtubs and plumbing</em></p>

  <p class="spiral-note">Building on: Change (Chapter 3), Time (Chapter 5), Feedback (Chapter 9)</p>

  <hr/>

  <p class="first">A bathtub has a level of water—that's the stock. Water flows in from the faucet—that's an inflow. Water flows out through the drain—that's an outflow. The level rises when inflow exceeds outflow and falls when outflow exceeds inflow.</p>

  <p>This simple model—stocks, inflows, outflows—underlies an enormous amount of system behavior. Once you see it, you see it everywhere.</p>

  <h2>Stocks as Accumulation</h2>

  <p class="first">A stock is an accumulation of something over time. It's a quantity that exists, that persists, that can be measured at a moment.</p>

  <p>Your bank balance is a stock. The population of a city is a stock. The amount of trust in a relationship is a stock. Your level of skill is a stock. A company's inventory is a stock. Carbon in the atmosphere is a stock.</p>

  <p>Stocks change only through flows. Money enters (income) and exits (spending). People are born (inflow) and die (outflow). Trust builds (positive interactions) and depletes (betrayals). The stock at any moment is the accumulation of all past flows.</p>

  <h2>Flows as Rates</h2>

  <p class="first">A flow is a rate—how much is moving per unit time.</p>

  <p>You earn $5,000 per month (inflow). You spend $4,500 per month (outflow). The net flow is $500 per month. Your bank balance stock rises by $500 each month.</p>

  <p>A company sells 1,000 units per day (outflow from inventory). It produces 1,100 units per day (inflow to inventory). The net flow is +100 units per day. Inventory grows.</p>

  <p>The key insight: stocks can only change through flows. You can't directly set a stock level; you can only influence the flows that change it. Want more savings? Increase income or decrease spending. Want more skill? Increase practice. Want more trust? Increase trustworthy behavior.</p>

  <h2>Seeing Systems as Plumbing</h2>

  <p class="first">Complex systems can often be understood as networks of stocks connected by flows.</p>

  <p>Consider the economy as plumbing. Money is a stock in various accounts. Income is a flow from employers to employees. Spending is a flow from consumers to businesses. Taxes are a flow from private to public. Government spending flows back to the private sector. The whole thing is plumbing.</p>

  <p>Consider your energy as plumbing. Energy is a stock. Sleep, food, and rest are inflows. Work, exercise, and stress are outflows. The stock rises and falls based on the balance of flows.</p>

  <p>Consider an organization's capability as plumbing. Skills and knowledge are stocks. Training and hiring are inflows. Attrition and forgetting are outflows.</p>

  <p>This view isn't complete—it misses much of what makes systems interesting—but it clarifies the basic dynamics. What's accumulating? What's flowing in? What's flowing out?</p>

  <h2>Delays and Momentum</h2>

  <p class="first">Stocks create momentum. Because the stock is the accumulation of past flows, it doesn't respond instantly to changes in flow.</p>

  <p>If you stop polluting today, the pollution stock doesn't instantly disappear—it's accumulated over years and will take years to deplete. If you start saving today, you don't instantly have savings—the stock takes time to build.</p>

  <p>This creates delays between action and effect. You change the flow, but the stock changes slowly. This delay is one of the reasons systems are hard to manage—you act, and nothing seems to happen, because the stock is still dominated by past accumulation.</p>

  <p>Patience is partly about understanding stocks. The flows you establish today will show up in stocks tomorrow. Trust builds slowly. Skill builds slowly. Savings build slowly. The delay isn't a problem—it's the nature of accumulation.</p>

  <h2>Feedback Involving Stocks</h2>

  <p class="first">Feedback loops often run through stocks.</p>

  <p>A higher bank balance (stock) might make you feel comfortable, reducing your saving effort (flow), which eventually reduces the balance. Negative feedback.</p>

  <p>A larger population (stock) produces more births (flow), which increases the population further. Positive feedback.</p>

  <p>Understanding these loops helps predict system behavior. Will the stock grow without bound? Decline to zero? Settle at some level? The feedback structure tells you.</p>

  <h2>Leverage and Stocks</h2>

  <p class="first">Sometimes the leverage point isn't the stock but the flows.</p>

  <p>You can't directly set someone's level of trust in you (stock). But you can influence the flows—behave more trustworthily (increase inflow), stop betraying (decrease outflow). Work on the flows; the stock follows.</p>

  <p>You can't instantly fix a company's culture (stock). But you can influence hiring (inflow), firing (outflow), training, and incentives. Work on the flows; the culture evolves.</p>

  <p>This is strategic patience. Don't expect instant stock changes. Establish the right flows and wait for accumulation.</p>

  <h2>The Seed</h2>

  <p class="first">Stocks and flows is a fundamental framework for systems thinking. Stocks are what accumulate. Flows are what move. Stocks change only through flows. Delays arise because stocks carry momentum.</p>

  <p>When you're trying to understand or change a system, ask: what are the stocks? What are the flows? How are they connected? This clarifies what can change quickly (flows) and what changes slowly (stocks), and it suggests where intervention might work.</p>
</body>
</html>