<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 38: Incentives (Growth)</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <span class="chapter-number">Chapter Thirty-Eight</span>
  <h1>Incentives</h1>
  <p class="first"><em>Misalignment explains everything</em></p>

  <p class="spiral-note">Spiral return: Incentives first appeared in Chapter 34. Now we see them at system scale.</p>

  <hr/>

  <p class="first">We've seen incentives at the individual level: people do what they're rewarded for. Now let's see how incentive structures shape entire systems—and how misaligned incentives create systemic dysfunction.</p>

  <h2>Incentives at Scale</h2>

  <p class="first">An organization is an incentive structure. Each role has incentives—what gets measured, what gets rewarded, what gets punished. The aggregate of these incentives produces organizational behavior.</p>

  <p>When incentives align with organizational goals, people pursuing their individual incentives collectively produce good outcomes. The salesperson's incentive to sell aligns with the company's need for revenue. The engineer's incentive to build good products aligns with user needs.</p>

  <p>When incentives misalign, individual pursuit produces collective dysfunction. Each person does what's rational for them, but the sum isn't what anyone wants. This is the tragedy of incentives.</p>

  <h2>Principal-Agent Problems</h2>

  <p class="first">One of the deepest incentive problems: the principal-agent problem.</p>

  <p>You (principal) hire someone (agent) to do something for you. But their incentives differ from yours. You want them to work hard and act in your interest. They might want to minimize effort and maximize their own benefit.</p>

  <p>Shareholders want executives to maximize long-term value. Executives might want to maximize their compensation, which is tied to short-term metrics. The misalignment produces short-termism.</p>

  <p>Patients want doctors to maximize health. Doctors in fee-for-service systems get paid for procedures. The misalignment can produce over-treatment.</p>

  <p>Citizens want politicians to serve the public good. Politicians need to win elections. The misalignment produces popularity-seeking over good policy.</p>

  <p>Principal-agent problems are everywhere, and they're hard to solve. Monitoring is costly. Contracts are incomplete. Interests are genuinely different.</p>

  <h2>Feedback Meets Incentives</h2>

  <p class="first">Incentives operate through feedback loops. Do X, get reward. The reward reinforces doing X.</p>

  <p>These loops can be positive or negative. A positive loop amplifies behavior: success leads to rewards, which motivate more of the same behavior, which leads to more success. A negative loop stabilizes: deviations from desired behavior get punished, which corrects the deviation.</p>

  <p>Well-designed incentive systems have negative feedback that keeps behavior in the desired range. Poorly designed systems have positive feedback that amplifies problematic behavior—the rewards encourage exactly the behavior that makes things worse.</p>

  <h2>Emergent Incentives</h2>

  <p class="first">Sometimes incentives aren't designed—they emerge from the system's structure.</p>

  <p>Nobody designed the incentive for social media to prioritize outrage. But the system rewards engagement, engagement is driven by strong emotions, and outrage is a strong emotion. The incentive emerged from the structure.</p>

  <p>Nobody designed the incentive for academic research to be incremental. But the system rewards publications, incremental work is easier to publish than revolutionary work, and revolutionary claims risk reputational damage. The incentive emerged.</p>

  <p>When you see dysfunction, look for emergent incentives. The behavior isn't random—it's responding to something. Find the incentive, and you've found the source.</p>

  <h2>Designing Incentive Systems</h2>

  <p class="first">If incentives shape behavior, then designing incentive systems is powerful—and difficult.</p>

  <p><strong>Align incentives with goals.</strong> Make the behavior you want the behavior that's rewarded. This sounds obvious but is surprisingly hard to achieve.</p>

  <p><strong>Anticipate gaming.</strong> People will optimize for what you measure. Will that optimization actually produce what you want? If the metric can be gamed without producing the desired outcome, it will be.</p>

  <p><strong>Use multiple metrics.</strong> A single metric can be gamed. Multiple metrics that triangulate on the goal are harder to game while missing the point.</p>

  <p><strong>Measure outcomes, not inputs.</strong> If possible, reward the result you want rather than the activities you think produce it. Let people find their own path to the outcome.</p>

  <p><strong>Be humble.</strong> Incentive design is hard. You'll probably get it wrong. Monitor, learn, adjust.</p>

  <h2>Adaptation Returns</h2>

  <p class="first">Incentive systems are subject to adaptation. As soon as you create an incentive, people start adapting to it—often in ways you didn't anticipate.</p>

  <p>This is why incentive design is iterative. You launch, observe the adaptations, learn what you missed, and adjust. The system is a game between the designer and the participants, and the participants are creative.</p>

  <p>Accept that perfect incentive design is impossible. The best you can do is thoughtful initial design plus ongoing learning and adjustment.</p>

  <h2>The Deeper Seed</h2>

  <p class="first">Incentives at system scale produce emergent behavior. Aligned incentives create functional systems; misaligned incentives create dysfunction. Principal-agent problems are pervasive. Emergent incentives arise from structure without design. And incentive systems must be designed, monitored, and adjusted in response to adaptation.</p>

  <p>When you see a system behaving badly, don't assume bad people. Assume bad incentives. Then ask how to change them.</p>
</body>
</html>