<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 43: Equilibrium (Power)</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <span class="chapter-number">Chapter Forty-Three</span>
  <h1>Equilibrium</h1>
  <p class="first"><em>Shifting stable states</em></p>

  <p class="spiral-note">Spiral return: Equilibrium first appeared in Chapter 12. Now we apply it to change.</p>

  <hr/>

  <p class="first">We've seen equilibria as stable states maintained by feedback. Now let's see them as targets for change. If you want to shift a system, you need to shift its equilibrium—or move it from one equilibrium to another.</p>

  <h2>Why Equilibria Resist Change</h2>

  <p class="first">Equilibria are stable because feedback loops maintain them. Push the system, and the loops push back. This is why surface-level change often doesn't stick.</p>

  <p>You introduce a new policy, and the organization adjusts around it, neutralizing its effect. You change your diet, and your body adjusts, making weight loss plateau. You try to improve a relationship, and old patterns reassert themselves.</p>

  <p>The equilibrium is the attractor. The system keeps returning to it because the feedback structure makes that the stable state.</p>

  <h2>Changing the Equilibrium</h2>

  <p class="first">To create lasting change, you often need to change where the equilibrium is, not just push the system temporarily away from it.</p>

  <p>This means changing the feedback structure itself. Change what's measured, what's rewarded, what's punished. Change the incentives, the defaults, the rules. Change the conditions so that the new desired state is the equilibrium—the place the system naturally rests.</p>

  <p>A thermostat example: pushing on the temperature doesn't change the equilibrium; changing the set point does. You want interventions that change the set point, not interventions that fight the existing set point.</p>

  <h2>Crossing to a New Equilibrium</h2>

  <p class="first">Sometimes systems have multiple equilibria—different stable states they could settle into. The goal is to move the system from a bad equilibrium to a good one.</p>

  <p>This is harder than it sounds. Between equilibria is often an unstable region. You have to push the system far enough to escape one basin of attraction and enter another. If you don't push hard enough, it falls back.</p>

  <p>This explains why some changes require sustained, concerted effort—a "big push." Gradual pressure isn't enough if the system keeps being pulled back. You need enough force to cross the threshold into the new basin.</p>

  <p>It also explains why some changes, once made, stick. Once you're in the new equilibrium, the feedback loops now maintain it. The hard part is getting there; staying there is easier.</p>

  <h2>Leverage for Equilibrium Shifts</h2>

  <p class="first">Where's the leverage for shifting equilibria?</p>

  <p><strong>Information flows:</strong> Sometimes making consequences visible changes equilibria. When people see the results of their actions, they adjust. Transparency can shift equilibria.</p>

  <p><strong>Feedback loops:</strong> Adding, removing, or redirecting feedback loops changes what states are stable. Can you create a negative feedback loop that stabilizes the desired state? Can you weaken the positive feedback that destabilizes it?</p>

  <p><strong>Thresholds:</strong> If you can move the system to a tipping point, a small additional push might complete the transition. Find the threshold and aim for it.</p>

  <p><strong>Initial conditions:</strong> If the system is being (re)started, the initial conditions matter. They determine which basin of attraction the system falls into. Design the initial conditions to favor the good equilibrium.</p>

  <h2>Stability vs. Change</h2>

  <p class="first">Equilibria are about stability. But sometimes you want change, not stability.</p>

  <p>The tension: stable systems are predictable and often desirable. But stable systems are also hard to improve. The same feedback that maintains stability resists beneficial change.</p>

  <p>The resolution: distinguish between stability you want and stability you don't. Protect the equilibria that serve you. Disrupt the equilibria that don't.</p>

  <p>This requires judgment. Which aspects of the system should be stable? Which should be fluid? There's no formula. But the framework—seeing equilibria, understanding what maintains them, knowing how to shift them—makes the judgment tractable.</p>

  <h2>The Full Power</h2>

  <p class="first">Equilibrium is now a tool for change. You see that systems resist change because feedback maintains their stable states. You know that lasting change requires shifting the equilibrium, not just pushing the system temporarily.</p>

  <p>You understand multiple equilibria and the challenge of crossing between basins. You know where the leverage is: information, feedback loops, thresholds, initial conditions.</p>

  <p>The prepared mind doesn't just push against systems and hope. It identifies the equilibrium, understands what maintains it, and works to shift the stability itself.</p>
</body>
</html>