<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 47: Inversion</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <span class="chapter-number">Chapter Forty-Seven</span>
  <h1>Inversion</h1>
  <p class="first"><em>Thinking backwards</em></p>

  <p class="spiral-note">Building on: Counterfactual (Chapter 33), Selection (Chapter 25)</p>

  <hr/>

  <p class="first">"Tell me where I'm going to die, so I won't go there." This was Charlie Munger's favorite piece of folk wisdom, and it captures the essence of inversion: instead of thinking about how to succeed, think about how to fail—and avoid that.</p>

  <p>Inversion is a powerful thinking tool. When forward thinking gets stuck, thinking backward often reveals a path.</p>

  <h2>The Logic of Inversion</h2>

  <p class="first">Many problems are easier to solve in reverse.</p>

  <p>Instead of asking "how do I make this project succeed?" ask "what would guarantee this project fails?" Then avoid those things. The negative space illuminates the positive.</p>

  <p>Instead of asking "how do I get healthy?" ask "what behaviors would guarantee I stay unhealthy?" Then stop doing those. The path to health becomes clearer.</p>

  <p>Instead of asking "how do I build a good relationship?" ask "what would destroy this relationship?" Then don't do those things.</p>

  <p>Inversion works because avoiding failure is often easier than achieving success. Success has many requirements; failure often has just a few reliable causes. Eliminate the causes of failure, and success becomes more likely.</p>

  <h2>Via Negativa</h2>

  <p class="first">There's an ancient idea: you know what's true by knowing what's false. You reach the positive through the negative. This is the "via negativa"—the negative way.</p>

  <p>Applied to action: instead of adding things that might help, remove things that definitely hurt. Subtraction instead of addition.</p>

  <p>In health, this might mean: rather than adding supplements, remove the habits that damage health. The removal often has more effect than the addition.</p>

  <p>In productivity, this might mean: rather than adding new tools, remove the distractions that destroy focus. Subtracting obstacles often beats adding resources.</p>

  <p>The via negativa is powerful because it's often easier to identify what's harmful than what's beneficial. We have more confidence about what fails than about what succeeds.</p>

  <h2>Pre-Mortems Revisited</h2>

  <p class="first">We encountered pre-mortems in the counterfactual chapter. They're inversion applied to planning.</p>

  <p>Imagine the project has failed. Why did it fail? By working backward from failure, you surface risks that forward-looking optimism hides. Then you can address those risks before they materialize.</p>

  <p>This is inversion in action: instead of planning for success, plan to avoid failure. The perspective shift reveals different considerations.</p>

  <h2>Selection Meets Inversion</h2>

  <p class="first">Inversion connects to selection. Selection eliminates what doesn't fit; what remains is what survives.</p>

  <p>Apply this to ideas: instead of trying to prove your idea is right, try to prove it's wrong. What survives the attack is more likely to be true. This is the scientific method—hypotheses are tested by trying to falsify them, not confirm them.</p>

  <p>Apply this to decisions: instead of trying to find the best option, try to eliminate the worst options. What remains is more likely to be good. Elimination is often easier than optimization.</p>

  <h2>When to Invert</h2>

  <p class="first">Inversion is especially useful when:</p>

  <p><strong>You're stuck going forward.</strong> If direct approaches aren't working, try the reverse. What would you need to avoid? What would guarantee failure?</p>

  <p><strong>Success is unclear but failure is obvious.</strong> If you're not sure what to do, you might be sure what not to do. Start there.</p>

  <p><strong>You're planning under uncertainty.</strong> Predicting success is hard; predicting common failure modes is easier. Use inversion to identify risks.</p>

  <p><strong>You're prone to optimism.</strong> Forward thinking often has an optimistic bias—you imagine success. Inversion forces you to imagine failure, balancing the view.</p>

  <h2>The Limits of Inversion</h2>

  <p class="first">Inversion is a tool, not a complete strategy.</p>

  <p>Avoiding failure doesn't guarantee success. You can avoid every known cause of failure and still fail in a new way. You can remove every obstacle and still lack what's needed to succeed.</p>

  <p>At some point, you need forward motion—positive action toward a goal. Inversion clears the path; it doesn't walk it.</p>

  <p>Use both. Invert to identify what to avoid. Go forward to identify what to pursue. Together, they give a fuller picture.</p>

  <h2>The Seed</h2>

  <p class="first">Inversion thinks backward: to achieve X, ask what would prevent X. Avoid those things. The negative path to the positive goal.</p>

  <p>Via negativa: remove harm rather than add help. Pre-mortems: imagine failure to prevent it. Falsification: stress-test ideas by trying to break them.</p>

  <p>The prepared mind inverts. When stuck, it asks "what would guarantee failure?" When planning, it asks "what would make this go wrong?" When reasoning, it asks "what would disprove this?" Thinking backward often reveals what forward thinking hides.</p>
</body>
</html>